Title: Project Proposal

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19931v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:37:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
Blame is easier than praise : Measuring off -ball defensive 

# performance in football 

Jonas Bischofberger *1,2,3✉, ORCID: 0000 -0002 -0878 -0641 , Runqing Ma *1,2✉, ORCID: 0009 -0007 -4250 -4687 ,

Pascal Bauer 4,5, ORCID: 0000 -0001 -8613 -6635 , Kilian Arnsmeyer 5, Arnold Baca 1, ORCID: 0000 -0002 -1704 -

> 0290

* Equal contribution  

> 1

Centre for Sport Science and University Sports, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria  

> 2

Vienna Doctoral School of Pharmaceutical, Nutritional and Sport Sciences (VDS -

PhaNuSpo) , University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria  

> 3

VfB Stuttgart 1893 AG, Stuttgart, Germany  

> 4

Universität des Saarlandes , Saarbrücken , Germany  

> 5

Deutscher Fußball -Bund e.V. (DFB), Frankfurt, Germany 

✉ jonas.bischofberger@univie.ac.at 

✉ runqing.ma@univie.ac.at 

# Abstract 

The defensive performance of football players is commonly measured through a 

limited number of actions like tackles and interceptions while the ir continuous 

impact through positional behaviour has hardly been studied before . We 

formulate this problem as an attribution over multi -agent spatiotemporal 

trajectories  without player -level ground truth labels , where event -level changes 

of expected threat are distributed among individual s. We propose a framework 

that performs this attribution using player involveme nt scores calculated from 

defensive pressure areas (DPAs) . By computing role -conditioned baselines 

within automatically detected team structures, we can determine each defender’s 

expected responsibil ity for threat created through arbitrary passes .

The validity and robustness of this approach are evaluated on a uniquely extensive 

cross -gender and cross -competition data set, including positional and event data 

from 64 matches of the men’s World Cup, 116 matches of the women's German 

Bundesliga and 336 matches of the men’s German 3. Liga. In the absence of a 

ground truth, we propose an evaluation protocol that combines multiple relatively 

weak proxies into robust summary scores. We find a validity score that is 

improved by around 1 standard deviation co mpared to the best action -based 

metric and demonstrate that many popular measures show limited validity. The 

“blame” for conceding high -value actions shows especially strong correlations 

with external ratings and market values , making it the first published metric in 

football to reliably measure positioning errors . All code underlying this work is publicly available to support reproducibility and further research. 

Keywords: Association football (soccer) , Defensive performance , Tracking data, 

formation detection, women’s football , match analysis 

# 1 Introduction 

“Offen ce wins games, defen ce wins championships ” (Robst et al. 2011) , this 

famous sports proverb has been passed down through generations of sports 

coaches and athletes. Although being of at least equal importance, defending is a 

far less easily measurable aspect of team sports compared to attacking 

performance (Villa, Lozano 2019; Ruan et al. 2022) . The simple counting of 

interceptions, blocks and tackl es is not sufficient , as these metrics are hard to 

define objectively and biased towards active participation , neglecting subtle but 

decisive contributions through positioning and anticipation which help the ir team 

maintain stability or support other players in winning the ball (Trainor 2014; 

Fernandez -Navarro et al. 2016; Toda et al. 2022) . A memorable example is 

central defender Virgil van Dijk who has been universally praised for his 

defensive abilities which earned him the second place at the Ballon d’Or 2019 ,

the most prestigious individual trophy in men’s football . Yet, his number of 

tackles, interceptions and blocks dur in g the corresponding domestic season 

merely place him in the 11 th , 19 th and 11 th percentile respectively (FBref 2025) .

The advent of tracking data has opened the door for advanced defensive 

performance metrics that  capture positional and spatial information . One strand 

of research in this area is focused on analysing “pressing”, the organized attempt 

of a team to exert pressure on the opponent and disrupt their attacking play 

(Andrienko et al. 2017; Bauer, Anzer 2021; Merckx et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2025) .

These studies typically use ball -wins as the outcome variable and try to relate 

them to team -level behaviours (Forcher et al. 2024) while player -level analysis 

revolves around contributions through pressuring opponents. 

The t eam -level analysis of defensive organization (Bauer et al. 2023; Umemoto, 

Fujii 2023; Eigenrauch et al. 2024) is more widespread than player -level 

attribution of defensive contributions . Some of them can spot weaknesses 

spatially (Stöckl et al. 2021; Ogawa et al. 2025) but lack the ability to distribute 

responsibility directly among individual players. Notably , Le et al. (2017) 

perform some limited player attribution by comparing player trajectories with 

“ghosted” trajectories predicted by a machine learning model. However, they 

found no straigh tforward correlation of being “out of position” with defensive 

success, indicating that their model may identify both moments of 

“unconventional” as well as “bad” defending. Wu and Swartz (2023) present a related approach where player velocities are compared with a “ghosted” velocity 

vector that indicates whether a player reacts to a given situation more rapidly than 

expected, providing a specific measure of anticipation skill. Llana et al. (2020) 

developed a classifier to detect passes behind the back and attribute the blame for 

such passes using normalized space control maps. 

Current studies, both at the team and player level, still miss an important aspect 

of defensive evaluation: how the outcome of a defensive action affect s the 

opponent’s attacking play. Although some studies consider such outcomes 

(Merhej et al. 2021; Rahimian, Toka 2024) , they are typically anchored on 

recorded defensive actions (e.g., pressures, tackles, interceptions) as the starting 

point. This focus overlooks situations where no action is recorded , for example 

when a defender is out of position, fails to provide cover, or leaves a passing lane 

open , even though these may directly enable valu able attacking opportunities. As 

a result, negative or missing defensive contributions are largely absent from the 

evaluation. 

This gap motivates a shift in perspective: instead of measuring defence only from 

the defender’s perspective, this study evaluates it through the lens of the attacking 

team’s passing outcomes , assigning blame and credit for opponent actions among 

defenders to account for active and passive individual contributions. To this end, 

efficient geometric rules are used to measure the degree of involvement in 

defending passes and derive defensive responsibility based on the long -running 

average involvement dependin g on the tactical role of a player . The metrics 

proposed  in this study  are validated extensively across three different data sets, 

covering both elite and lower -level professional football as well as women’s and 

men’s competitions , constituting the first comprehensive evaluation of metrics 

related to individual defensive positioning performance in the literature. To the 

best of our knowledge this is also the first study using a near -full season of 

women’s event and positional data. With this thorough evalua tion and the 

publication of the code of our model (Bischofberger 2025) , we hope to build the 

foundation for novel developments in this under -studied area of sports analytics. 

Section 2 details the data set used in this study . Section 3 lays out the modelling 

framework behind involvement - and responsibility -based metrics . Section 4 

describes the evaluation routine while Section 5 shows its results. Section 6 

provides a detailed discussion of the results, followed by Section 7 which 

discusses the limitations of the presented work. Section 8 briefly concludes th e

work. 

# 2 Data 

For model construction and validation, we use a n extensive multi -league and cross -gender spatiotemporal football dataset , as presented in Table 1 . The data set 

comprise s the Men’s FIFA World Cup 2022  and the German domestic leagues 

Frauen -Bundesliga and 3. Liga during the 2023/24 season . The Frauen -

Bundesliga is known to be one of the world’s strongest domestic women’s 

football competitions, representing an elite performance level as well as the men’s 

World Cup . The 3. Liga represents the men’s third tier of the German league 

system with a significantly lower level of competition. It is a professional, single -

track competition tha t is known for a more combative playing style compared to 

top -level competitions .

Table 1. Overview of the multi -source dataset                     

> Competition Season Matches Total
> passes
> Total
> frames
> Data provider
> Tracking
> data Event data
> Men’s World
> Cup 2022 64 29,931 11,849,751 PFF FC
> (30 fps) PFF FC
> Google Pixel
> Frauen -
> Bundesliga
> 2023/2024 116 100,128 16,784,449 STS/ Track
> 160 (25
> fps)
> STS
> Men’s 3.
> Liga 2023/2024 336 283,703 49,286,358

The tracking data consist of high -frequency optical spatiotemporal recordings at 

25 –30 frames per second (fps). For each match, the locations (X and Y 

coordinates) of all players and the ball are continuously captured, generating over 

130,000 frames per match. Tracking data of the leagues has been captured by 

Sportec Solutions (STS) and Track160 us ing optical tracking . Due to quality 

issues in individual matches, the season 2023/24 is not completely covered: 16 

matches (12.1%) from the Frauen -Bundesliga and 44 matches from the 3. Liga 

(11.6%) are absent from the provided data set. The World Cup data originates 

from PFF FC (FC 2025) , a commercial data provider that generates tracking data 

from existing broadcast video. 

The player positions are enriched by event data which co mprise more than 

400,000 passing events in total, including the start and end locations of the pass, 

the identities of the passer and receiver, and the pass outcome ( e.g ., successful, 

intercepted). These events were manually recorded by trained operators from the 

data providers STS and PFF FC. The manual nature of event data collection 

together with the lack of a previous validation study of the employed tracking 

systems should be kept in mind as a pot ential limitation of this data set. The German domestic data is provided in the Common Data Format (CDF) 

(Anzer et al. 2025) , a unified format for football match data that simplifies the 

process of performing analyses across data sets . The proprietary format of the 

World Cup data was converted into the CDF to be processed in unison. To align 

the timestamps of the tracking and event data of the German competitions , we use 

the synchronization supplied in the CDF (Anzer, Bauer 2021; Anzer et al. 2025) .

For the World Cup data, we use the provider’s native synchronization. An 

example frame of synchronized data is shown in Figure 1.                   

> Figure 1. Example of synch ronized data during a pass, with the position of all players on the
> field, red dots for attacking players, blue dots for defending players , a black cross for the ball
> and adirected arrow for the pass trajectory .

# 3 Model specification 

The model follows several consecutive step s: During pre -processing, all features 

required to model defensive attribution are calculated : Pass value , measured 

through Expected Threat (Singh 2018) , the expected receiver of failed passes, and 

the role of each player based on dynamically calculated team formations. Second, 

the degree of involvement of every defender with respect to every pass in the 

match is determined based on their spatial proximity and interceptio n actions .

Third, the involvement values are averaged for every triplet consisting of: (a) 

passer role , (b) (intended ) receiver role and (c) defender role to obtain a measure 

of expected involvement, or responsibility , and appl ied back to each individual 

pass. Finally, involvemen t- and responsibility -based metrics are aggregated and 

normalized to obtain final player -role -level KPIs. The entire process is shown in 

Figure 2. Figure 2.  Overview of the model ling  pipeline .

## 3.1  Defensive involvement 

The evaluation of defensive performance in this study begins with the attacking 

team’s passing actions. Each pass receives a value that reflects its impact on the 

attacking progression. From the defensive perspective, the same pass implies an 

opposite contribution: if the pass increases the attacking threat, it represents a 

defensive failure, whereas if it decreases the attackin g threat, it reflects defensive 

success. 

To attribute this defensive value to individual players, the model incorporates the 

spatial context of defending by defining defensive pressure areas (DPAs) during 

the moment of the pass depending on the outcome of the pas s. Defenders located 

within this area or performing an interception are considered involved in the 

action and thus either effectively contribute to a decrease in attacking threat or 

fail to intervene in a pass that increases attacking threat .

3.1.1 Expected  Defensive  Threat (xDT) 

Expected Threat (xT) (Singh 2018)  is chosen  to measure the value of passes , as 

it is known to be robust, which is essential for being used as a component of a 

more complex modelling routine (Van Roy et al. 2020) . xT represents the 

probability of scoring a goal within the next few actions based on a fixed spatial 

grid. The model estimate s scoring and transition likelihoods within a Markov 

chain from historical events to generate its final value estimate. 

In this study,  the pitch is divided into 16  × 12 grid cells  following  Singh (2018) ,

a resolution that preserves  sufficient passing information while avoiding 

excessive sparsity or heterogeneity . The xT model is fit ted independently to the 

Hudl StatsBomb open data set (Statsbomb 2024) of the men’s World Cup 2022 

to reduce bias in xT estimates . Figure 3 shows the xT distribution across the pitch. Figure 3. The xT plot of the World Cup 2022, for each zone .

The value of a pass is calculated as the difference in xT between its start and end 

location: 

∆𝑥𝑇 = 𝑥𝑇 𝑒𝑛𝑑 − 𝑥𝑇 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡  (1) 

A positive value means that the pass increased the team’s scoring probability, 

whereas a negative value indicates that the pass reduced the team’s scoring 

probability .

While passing events originate from the attacking side, the defensive perspective 

is evaluated as Expected Defensive Threat ( 𝒙𝑫𝑻 ). For successful passes that are 

completed and received by an attacking teammate, the corresponding  𝑥𝐷𝑇  value 

is the negative value of  ∆𝑥𝑇 . For instance, a highly valuable pass for the attacking 

team with  ∆𝑥𝑇 = +0.2 corresponds to a negative defensive value  𝑥𝐷𝑇 = −0.2

for the defending side , indicating a failure to prevent a dangerous pass . For 

unsuccessful passes,  𝑥𝑇 𝑒𝑛𝑑  can be considered zero as the team loses possession, 

which accordingly results in a positive value for  𝑥𝐷𝑇  that is equal to the offensive 

value of the starting location of the pass. 

𝑥𝐷𝑇 = { −∆𝑥𝑇 , 𝑖𝑓 𝑡 ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑖𝑠 𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒 𝑠𝑠 𝑓𝑢𝑙 

𝑥𝑇 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , 𝑖𝑓 𝑡 ℎ𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑖𝑠 𝑢𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑓𝑢𝑙  (2) 

3.1.2 Defensive Pressure Area s (DPA s)

In football, defensive responsibilit y can rarely be pinpointed to a single individual 

but is usually shared among multiple defenders . An initial attempt to distribute 

responsibility can be based on spatial proximity to the pass: A defending player 

who is close to the action receives credit or blame for th e value that this action 

generates. To identify which defenders are involved in a certain pass event, we 

propose to define a Defensive Pressure Area (DPA) . The DPA s define a spatial 

range at the moment of the pass within which players are considered capable of preventing the pass or exerting pressure. By establishing this area  using  detailed 

positional data, defensive pressure can  be assign ed  to the involved defenders. 

Based on the outcome and the value of the pass , four types of assignments are 

distinguished.  The definitions and corresponding visualization are shown below 

and in  Figure 4 :

1.  Successful passes with negative  𝒙𝑫𝑻  : Defensive involvement is 

considered around both the passer, the receiver and along the pass lane, 

represented by circles of radius r = 5 m and a rectangular zone connecting 

them. This area accounts for a failure to prevent both the pass and the 

reception and a failure to intercept along the pass trajectory. 

2.  Successful passes with positive  𝒙𝑫𝑻 : Defensive pressure is considered 

only around the passer (circle of radius r = 5 m). These are typically 

backward passes, where defenders force the passer to play the ball 

back wards , thus making the defende rs around the pass er most relevant .

3.  Unsuccessful passes going out of play : Defensive pressure is considered 

only around the passer (circle of radius r = 5 m). 

4.  Unsuccessful passes intercepted:  In this case, no DPA is defined, as the 

defensive value is directly attributed to the specific defender who intercept s

the ball.                

> (a) Successful passes with negative 𝑥𝐷𝑇 (b) Successful passes with positive 𝑥𝐷𝑇
> (c) Unsuccessful passes going out of play (d) Unsuccessful passes intercepted
> Figure 4.Four types of DPA s,depending on the value and outcome of the pass. The yellow cross indicates the expected receiver of an unsuccessful pass.

The radius of 5 meters is chosen to represent a rough estimate of the area of 

influence of a defender . A lower radius might risk missing actual pressure and 

involvement while a higher radius might lead to a weaker attribution between 

players and stronger intra -team correlations in the final metrics .

Since there is no ground truth (Davis et al. 2024) for defensive involvement or 

the individual attribution of offensive value, the specific areas are handcrafted 

rather than determined empirically. Data -driven modelling or parameter 

optimization with respect to unreliable benchmarks would risk overfitting and 

reproducing biases present in the selected target variable.  Reachable areas based 

on motion models (Renkin et al. 2022) were also not used, as physically reachable 

areas may overestimate the involvement of players who are additionally restricted 

by team tactics . The relation between potential motion, pressure, and possible 

interception would introduce additional modelling complexity. Instead, a simpler 

representation of spatial proximity based on reasonable geometric assumptions 

was adopted to maintain model simpli ci ty, robustness , and computational 

efficiency .

3.1.3 Individual defensive attribution 

For defenders located within each DPA s, involvement is distributed according to 

their relative proximity to the pass . The closer a defender is to the passer or the 

pass trajectory , the greater the defensive pressure they are assumed to exert. For 

pass  𝑝  with value  𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 , the raw p roximity  𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  and the valued proximity  𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖  for 

player  𝑖  are defined as: 

𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖 = (𝑟 − 𝑑 𝑖 )

𝑟  (3) 

𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖 = 𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 × 𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  (4)

where  𝑑 𝑖  is the E uclidean distance from player  𝑖  to t he edge of the DPA and  𝑟  is 

the radius of the circle s shown in Figure 4.

The values of raw proximity  𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  and valued proximity  𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖  can be interpreted 

depending on their real football meaning : 𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  and  𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖  for passes with positive 

xDT (i.e. negative xT) reflect a defender’s successful participation in suppressing 

attacking threat and are therefore referred to as raw (𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  ) and valued (𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖  )

contribution . 𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  and  𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖  for passes with negative xDT (i.e. positive xT) reflect 

a defensive failure, indicating that the defender was involved in but did not prevent an increase in attacking threat ; this is referred to as fault . To account for 

overall participation regardless of the outcome, we also define involvement as the 

sum of the absolute values of contribution and fault. Details and description s of 

these three types of metrics are shown in Table 2 below. They allow each passing 

event to be decomposed into player -level defensive attributions, distinguishing 

between effective contributions, defensive failures, and overall involvement. 

Table 2. Involvement -based defensive performance metrics for individual player  𝑖 

Metric  Symbol  Equation  Range  Interpretation 

Raw 

contribution  𝐶 𝑟  𝐶 𝑟 = ∑ 𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖    

> 𝑝 𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 ≥0

[0, ∞) Intercepting and 

pressuring the 

opponent into 

low -value passes. 

Valued 

contribution  𝐶 𝑣  𝐶 𝑣 = ∑ 𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖    

> 𝑝 𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 ≥0

[0, ∞)

Raw fault  𝐹 𝑟  𝐹 𝑟 = ∑ 𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖    

> 𝑝 𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 <0

[0, ∞) Allowing 

dangerous passes ,

“getting 

outplayed” Valued fault  𝐹 𝑣  𝐹 𝑣 = ∑ |𝑉 𝑝 ,𝑖 |    

> 𝑝 𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝐷𝑇 𝑝 <0

[0, ∞)

Raw 

involvement  𝐼 𝑟  𝐼 𝑟 = 𝐶 𝑟 + 𝐹 𝑟  [0, ∞) Defensive 

activity 

Valued 

involvement  𝐼 𝑣  𝐼 𝑣 = 𝐶 𝑣 − 𝐹 𝑣  (−∞, ∞) Overall 

performance 

## 3.2 Formation  detection  & responsibility 

A limitation of measuring defensive performance through spatial proximity is that 

this approach does not take into account whether a player is caught out of position. 

For example, a defender might cause high -xT passes by leaving their assigned 

role vacated but would not receive any blame in terms of involvement as he or 

she was located far away from those passes. 

Our solution is to model defensive responsibility for an action as the expected 

involvement based on specific features that determine which player “should” 

defend a pass. Since , in practice, defensive responsibility is usually tied to the 

role of the player within a team’s tactical setup, we model responsibility as the 

average involvement for each triplet of (1) the role of the passer, (2) the role of 

the receiver and (3) the role of the defender. With larger amounts of data available 

per competition, more variables like the position of the ball or the identity of the team could be considered . T he choice of variables in this work reflects a trade -

off between robustness and informativeness of responsibility estimates .

In order to assign roles , the formation of both teams is identified using a template 

matching algorithm . Formations are determined separately for each phase of play 

in which one team maintains continuous possession of the ball. Both teams’ X

and Y positions are averaged , z-score standardized for each ball -in -play phase ,

and matched against a catalog of seven formations with 11 players, three 

fo rmations with 10 players and one formation with 9 players. Player s are 

categorized into 20 different roles within the following 6 role groups : Centr e Back 

(CB) , Full Back (FB) , Central Midfielder (CM) , Central Attacking Midfiel der 

(CAM) , Attacking Winger (Winger) , and Central Forward (CF ). The resulting 

roles and formations are shown in Figure 5. The choice of available templates and 

roles is made to balance the variety of formations with the number of resulting 

examples per role triplet for robust estimates of responsibility. The modelling 

approach does not depend on any particular set of roles or formations. 

Figure 5. Presence of roles within each considered formation. Formations 

marked with * consist of fewer than 11 players. 

A matching distance between the real player positions and each template is 

calculated by solving a linear sum assignment with the Euclidean distance as the 

cost function. The assignment costs are then smooth ed using a Gaussian kernel 

with a standard deviation of 7.5 minutes to avoid spurious formation transitions 

due to temporary positional adjustments. The formation is then determined per 

phase according to the lowest smoothed cost value. 

Based on the roles that result from the formation detection , responsibility is 

defined as the average involvement over the roles of the passer, receiver, and 

defender, separately for each competition . One example of responsibility values for passes from a left back (LB) to a left winger (LW) is given in Table 3. From 

this type of pass, the most involved roles are right winger (RW), right wing -back 

(RWB), and right central midfielder (RCM). A player who is currently assigned 

to a certain defensive role receives his or her responsibility for a pass according 

to the model, irrespective of his or her actual location on the pitch.                                    

> Table 3. Example responsibility values from the FIFA Men’s World Cup 2022 .
> Responsibility values represent the average involvement for each combination of roles over
> the entire competition.
> Passer role Receiver role Defender role Responsibility
> LB LW RW 0.196
> LB LW RWB 0.151
> LB LW RCM 0.130
> LB LW RS 0.109
> LB LW RDM 0.085
> …………
> LB LW CB -30.000

To obtain the missing receiver role for unsuccessful passes, the expected receiver 

for these passes is estimate d using the method proposed by Power et al. (2017) .

It finds the most likely receiver out of all possible receivers as the player  𝑖  with 

the lowest distance to the end point of the pass and the lowest angular deviation 

from the line of pass according to the following Equation (5).

𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟 = arg 𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑖 ( 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐 𝑒 𝑖 

𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑗 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐 𝑒 𝑗 

× 𝐴𝑛𝑔𝑙 𝑒 𝑖 

𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑗 𝐴𝑛𝑔𝑙 𝑒 𝑗 

) (5) 

Here,  𝑖  and  𝑗  index candidate receiver s, and min denote s the minimum value 

across all potential receivers. 

The raw responsibility values exemplified in Table 3 can be used instead of the 

raw proximity values  𝑅 𝑝 ,𝑖  to obtain a corresponding responsibility -based metric 

for any involvement -based metric . Analogously to Table 2, we call the 

responsibility -based metrics responsibility, fault responsibility , and contribution 

responsibility .

## 3.4 Metric s aggregation 

Since all metrics are defined on the level of individual events, a fine -grained aggregation of player metrics can be performed at the levels of match, player, and 

player role. In this way, chang ing responsibilities due to positional and team -

tactical switches within a match are considered .

After summing up position -specific match -level totals , two aggregation methods 

are used to arrive at final player -position -level metrics: per 90 minutes and per 

pass . Aggregating per 90 minutes means taking the total of a metric and dividing 

it by the total number of played minutes times 90 . While per 90 minutes is the 

typical way of aggregating performance data in football analytics , an additional 

aggregation per pass of the opponent team is also calculated to normalize pass -

related defensive metrics by the number of opportunities to defend (Antonio 

2013) .

Preliminary experiments show that the validity of fault -related metrics is higher 

when aggregated per 90 minutes whereas contribution -based metrics perform 

better when aggregated per pass. To obtain promising combined metrics , a n

equation is propose d to fuse these aggregates into a combined involvement or 

responsibility as follows:           

> 𝐼 𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑 =𝐶 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
> 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑑 ×250 −
> 𝐹 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
> 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑑 ×90

(6) 

Where  𝐼 𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑  is the fused metric , 𝐶 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  is the total contribution and  𝐹 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  is the 

total fault. The value 90 corresponds to the typical number of minutes within a 

match and 250 corresponds to a rough estimate of the typical number of passes 

faced in a match combined with an additional weighting factor between fault and 

contribution. Equatio n ( 6) is calculated for the following four metrics: raw 

involvement, valued involvement, raw responsibility, and valued responsibility ,

each using their corresponding fault and contribution metric. 

# 4 Model Validation 

Involvement - and responsibility -based metrics are benchmark ed  against  current 

state -of -art metrics that are commonly used to measure defensive contributions :

In particular , tackl es won, tackl es won rati o, and interceptions are considered ,

where the number of i nterceptions is of particular interest as it is the only 

widespread metric that also captures the quality of defensive positioning . These 

metrics are readily available in all present datasets and widely used in the football 

analytics sphere (Freitas et al. 2023) .

To arrive at a formal estimate on whether our metrics provide a benefit over 

existing ones, the ir validity and robustness are compared across three different 

data sets that span genders and competition levels. 4. 1 Validity 

Estimating the validity of defensive player metrics is difficult as there is no gold 

standard available. To get an estimate of the plausibility of our metrics, we 

examine the correlation coefficient  𝑟 𝑀𝑉  of our metrics with market values from 

“transfermarkt.de ” and “soccerdonna.de ” (Donna 2025; Markt 2025) as well as 

the correlation coefficient  𝑟 𝐹𝐼𝐹𝐴  with “defensive awareness ” ratings from the 

video game series FIFA (Futbin 2025) .

Transfermarkt .de and soccerdonna .de provide crowd -sourced estimates of a 

player’s value on the transfer market which give a rough estimate of a player’s 

economic value which in turn is intimately tied to their overall performance level. 

The values are sourced from December 2023. FIFA ratings are compiled by an 

extensive data collection system supplied by a worldwide network of scouts and 

databases and are broken down by specific skills such as “defensive awareness ”.

The ratings are sourced from the 2024 and 2022 edition s, corresponding to the 

respective seasons of our tracking and event data. 

Both sources provide external ratings with large qualitative contributions that 

provide a n external and objective benchmark for our metrics. Since defensive 

positioning skill is subtle , strong confounding factors are expected in these 

benchmarks . For example, a defender who is generally considered elite in terms 

of other defending skills such as tackl es or athleticism might also be rated as a 

player with high positioning skill due to the Halo effect (Nisbett, Wilson 1977) .

Therefore, to strengthen the signal in the external ratings, the correlation analysis 

only includes central defenders , for whom defensive positioning is most relevant 

to determine overall performance . Player -role combinations below 300 minutes 

(3. Liga) and 150 minutes ( Frauen -Bundesliga, World Cup) are also exclude d

from the analysis to reduce the sampling error of individual performance 

estimates. 

## 4. 2 Robustness 

Additional to showing whether the metrics accurately measure defensive 

positioning skill based on external ratings, internal properties of these metrics are 

also measu red to represent robustness and discriminatory ability (Franks et al. 

2016) . To measure these properties, three measure s are used: (a) the intraclass 

correlation coefficient  𝐼𝐶𝐶 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ on the match level to determine the degree to 

which match -by -match performance is repeatable and has discriminatory power ,

(b) the Pearson correlation  𝑟 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡  of the KPI in the first half of the season with 

the KPI in the second half of the season to see if performance is typically repeated 

over longer period s of time and (c) the season -level intraclass correlation coefficient  𝐼𝐶𝐶 𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 , obtained by bootstrap sampling and aggregating all match 

performances to measure the robustness of season aggregates .

For the  FIFA  Men’s World Cup data,  𝑟 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡  is excluded as the number of 

matches per team becomes too low when cut in half . For  𝐼𝐶𝐶 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ, only role -

specific match performances above 30 minutes are considere d, and for  𝐼𝐶𝐶 𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 

and  𝑟 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡 , player -role combinations below 300 minutes of total playing time 

are exclude d. In the Frauen -Bundesliga and World Cup , where the number of 

matches is more limited, the threshold is reduce d to 150 minutes. The role group 

is added as a covariate to the statistical models behind all meta -metrics to adjust 

for positional differences .

## 4.3 Summary scores 

To provide a categorical summary of the analysed metrics, Validity and 

Robustness scores are derived by calculating z -scores of all corresponding 

metrics over the analysed KPIs and competitions,  as  shown in Equations (7) and 

(8). These scores are subsequently averaged across the three data sets to yield an 

overall evaluation of each metric’s performance.             

> 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 =𝑧 (𝑟 𝑀𝑉 )+𝑧 (𝑟 𝐹𝐼𝐹𝐴 )
> 2(7)
> 𝑅𝑜𝑏𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 =𝑧 (𝐼𝐶𝐶 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ)+𝑧 (𝑟 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑡 )+𝑧 (𝐼𝐶 𝐶 𝑆𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 )
> 3(8)

# 5 Results 

After removing role -player combinations with an insufficient number of minutes, 

159 performances in the World Cup (60 from central defenders) , 236 

performances in the Frauen -Bundesliga (47 from central defenders) , and 360 

performances in the 3. Liga (81 from central defenders) are retained .

Figure 6 exemplarily shows the correlation of the number of interceptions per 90 

minutes and valued fault with external ratings for the Frauen -Bundesliga 23/24, 

illustrating that the classical interceptions metric fails for defenders, i.e. central 

defenders (CB) and full -backs (FB) .(a -i)  (a -ii)       

> (b -i) (b -ii)
> Figure 6. Correlation of the number of (a) interceptions per 90 minutes and (b) valued fault
> per 90 minutes with the (i) “Defensive Awareness” FIFA rating and (ii) market value.

Figure 7 shows that the strongest metrics with above -average validity and 

robustness are the fault -related metrics raw fault per 90 minutes and valued fault 

responsibility per 90 minutes , as well as the fused metrics raw involvement , raw 

responsibility and valued responsibility . Also above average score raw 

contribution per pass and interceptions per pass . The metric that shows the 

highest validity but slightly below -average robustness is valued fault per 90 

minutes .

It is evident from Figure 7 that fault -based metrics perform much better per 90 

minutes than per pass while contribution -based metrics perform much better per 

pass than per 90 minutes . The naïve combined metrics involvement and responsibility consequently perform weakly, while the custom fused versions 

perform well. 

In terms of robustness, raw metrics generally perform better than valued metrics 

and responsibility -based metrics generally perform better than involvement -

based metrics while the effects of both on validity are mixed. Fault generally 

performs better than contribution with raw contribution per pass being the only 

competitive contribution -based metric. While many contribution -based metrics 

show strong correlations with external ratings, these correlations are reversed: 

The higher the contribution, the lower the external rating of the player.  

> Figure 7. Validity and Robustness scores of all analysed metrics. Higher values on the y -axis
> indicate stronger correlations with external ratings, and higher values on the x -axis indicate
> greater stability and discriminatory ability.

Figure 8 compares all metrics across competitions. It is clear that our novel 

metrics outperform classic metrics in the FIFA  Men ’s  World Cup and Frauen -

Bundesliga. In the 3. Liga however , the strongest metrics only marginally 

outperform the number of interceptions per 90 minutes and are slightly 

outperformed in terms of robustness. (a) Men’s World Cup  (b) Men’s 3. Liga  (c) Frauen -Bundesliga 

> Figure 8. Comparison of Validity and Robustness scores across competitions.

Figure 9 exemplarily displays the central defenders at the men’s World Cup in 

terms of valued fault and raw contribution , two complementary metrics with the 

high est validity score . Table 4 and 5 show the top ten central defenders and full 

backs in the women’s Bundesliga according to fused involvement and 

responsibility.  

> Figure 9 .Players plot for v alued fault per 90 and raw contribution per pass. Only central

defenders with more than 150 minutes spent in that role are included. 

Table 4. Top 10 central defenders in the Frauen -Bundesliga 2023/24 according to 

fused valued involvement. 

Player  Team  Fused valued 

involvement 

Minutes 

as CB 

Age 

(2024) 

Market 

value 

2024 (€) 

Market 

value 

rank 

Magdalena 

Eriksson 

Bayern 

München  1.86  537  30  165,000  2

Marina Hegering  VfL 

Wolfsburg  1.56  615  33  60,000  10 

Glódís 

Viggósdóttir 

Bayern 

München  1.46  950  28  165,000  2

Alina Axtmann  SC Freiburg  0.28  405  18  25,000  32 

Michaela Specht  1899 

Hoffenheim  -0.12  563  26  45,000  14 

Tainara  Bayern 

München  -0.18  181  24  125,000  6

Linda Sembrant  Bayern 

München  -0.19  266  36  30,000  26 

Dominique 

Janssen 

VfL 

Wolfsburg  -0.26  594  29  180,000  1

Sara Doorsoun  Eintracht 

Frankfurt  -0.46  956  32  75,000  8

Samantha 

Steuerwald  SC Freiburg  -0.55  516  25  45,000  14 

Table 5. Top 10 full backs in the Frauen -Bundesliga 2023/24 according to fused 

valued responsibility .

Player  Team  Fused valued 

responsibility 

Minutes 

as FB 

Age 

(2024) 

Market value 

2024 (€)

Market 

value 

rank 

Tuva Hansen  Bayern 

München  0.073  246  26  75 ,000 €  10 

Lynn Wilms  VfL 

Wolfsburg  0.049  562  23  100,000 €  7

Nuria Rábano  VfL 

Wolfsburg  0.022  558  24  125,000 €  6

Giulia Gwinn  Bayern 

München  0.010  717  24  225,000 €  1

Lisann Kaut  1899 

Hoffenheim  -0.021  190  23  10,000 €  48 Katharina                           

> Naschenweng
> Bayern
> München -0.023 625 26 150,000 € 3
> Verena
> Hanshaw
> Eintracht
> Frankfurt -0.032 779 30 60,000 € 14
> Joelle
> Wedemeyer
> VfL
> Wolfsburg -0.033 361 27 60,000 € 14
> Pia -Sophie
> Wolter
> Eintracht
> Frankfurt -0.033 859 26 70,000 € 12
> Felicitas Rauch VfL
> Wolfsburg -0.037 210 27 150,000 € 3

# 6 Discussion 

Our results show that involvement - and responsibility -based metrics provide a 

clear, measurable benefit over the state -of -the -art to capture defensive positioning 

in terms of validity and robustness . Raw fault , raw involvement and valued 

responsibility overall outperform the strongest classic metric for defensive 

positioning, interceptions per pass , in terms of validity and robustness across 

genders and competition levels. Valued fault and raw contribution show lower 

robustness yet strong validity. Our metrics also take rich context into account: 

Pass value, as well as the exact defender location and their role within an 

automatically recognized tactical setup. 

Interestingly, fault -related metrics generally seem to outperform contribution -

based metrics. This align s with the nature of defending , which is fundamentally 

about preventing mistakes. Defenders can perform on a high level for most of a 

match, but one mistake is enough to lead to a goal and potentially cost their team 

points. Positive contributions like winning the ball and exerting pressure are also 

important but do not carry the same weight as critical failure s to prevent danger .

We find two properties of our metrics that regulate them towards high er stability: 

Adding a location -independent responsibility and removing pass value. Both 

approaches allow for lower variance on the event level and thus lead to more 

easily repeatable metrics while retaining the ability to distinguish players . Yet ,

valued responsibility remains strong in both robustness and validity, while valued 

fault achieves the highest validity out of all metrics albeit lower robustness. 

We also observe that the effectiveness of metrics differs drastically depending on 

the aggregation method: Per 90 minutes work s better for fault metrics, where the 

simple accumulation of mistakes indeed likely leads to a worse performance 

judgement . Per pass however works better for contributions and interceptions 

where otherwise teams with lower possession would automatically score better 

due to having more opportunities to defend . Since contribution and fault require different aggregation methods, combining them into an involvement or 

responsibility score requires a non -trivial fusion of these aggregation methods. 

Indeed, we observe that the fused aggregation of fault and contribution strongly 

outperforms naïve responsibility and involvement scores. Of the four fused 

metrics, only valued involvement falls short in terms of robustness as it allows 

high variation due to its inclusion of both action value and precise player locations. 

Our metrics outperform traditional metrics in both men’s and women’s elite -level 

competitions. However, i n the men’s 3. Liga, we find a lower overall level of 

validity with our metrics and classic metrics achieving similar levels of validity .

An explanation for this might be the even skill level in this competition: The best 

team of the 3. Liga 2023/24, SSV Ulm, scored 2 .03 points per match while the 

weakest one, SC Freiburg II, achieved 0.79. In comparison, Bayern München won 

the championship in the Frauen -Bundesliga 2023/24 with 2 .73 points per match 

while MSV Duisburg finished last with 0 .18 points per game, representing a much 

larger performance gap in that league compared to the 3. Liga. A large skill gap 

also exists in the men’s World Cu p, where the world’s elite teams with estimated 

market values above 1 billion € compete with teams that are valued almost two 

orders of magnitude lower : in the 2022 edition, England was estimated as the 

most valuable participant at 1.26 billion Euros while Qatar was the team with the 

lowest market value, estimated at merely 14.9 million Euros according to 

“transfermarkt.de ”. Steeper skill differences between players are easier for a 

metric to pick up than small differences which might explain the better 

performance of involvement - and responsibility -based metrics in elite -level 

competitions . Additionally, a n even skill distribution could lead to more tightly 

contested matches which promote combative playing styles where active 

defensive contributions become more highly valued than passive ones .

The optimal metric does not just seem to depend on the competition but also on 

the defender’s role : As shown in Figure 7, the validity of fault seems to be slightly 

higher than the validity of responsibility fault for central defenders. However, if 

we take the example of Kylian Mbappé who is known to have played a role with 

little defensive involvement in the World Cup 2022 , his raw fault places him as 

the third best defending winger in the world cup while according to raw fault 

responsibility, he is placed as the third weakest defending winger . This contrasts 

with many offensive metrics like pass completion rate and expected threat where 

the same metric can be used to measure sim ilar skills across roles. 

# 7 Limitations 

Team strength is a n important confounding factor in our validation analysis : In 

football, ball possession is strongly correlated with general team and player 

quality: We can observe this from the strong negative correlation of passes against per 90 minutes with market values . All negative per -90 metrics like fault 

are therefore inflated to some degree as they automatically punish teams more 

that spend a lot of time defending and less time in possession . Conversely, per 

pass aggregation favo urs players from high possession teams with regards to 

positive contribution s, as they typically play in more aggressive defending 

schemes that allow them to perform a higher number of effective interceptions 

and pressures per opponent pass. Since it is not clear whether both effects occur 

to a similar extent, compariso ns between per -90 and per -pass metrics require 

caution. In add ition, t he validation against market values and FIFA ratings comes 

with obvious confounders like age, popularity, and a lack of specificity in 

measuring defensive off -ball skill. The optimal way to assess the validity of 

player performance indicators given the lack of a gold standard is an open 

question in sports analytics. 

The techniques presented in this paper attempt s to limit complexity by using 

simple geometric considerations instead of taking advanced variables like pass 

duration, pressure intensity or body orientation into account. The metrics are 

designed and tested to yield robust overall evaluations of players and teams rather 

than detailed insight into specific situations. Future enhancements could build on 

our baseline by deploying more sophisticated measures of involvement and 

responsibility , focusing more on indi vidual accountability in specific situations .

Bias could be introduced by additional factors : For example, defensive metrics 

are typically strongly influenced by the behaviour of the attacking team, which 

can systematically affect the ratings of players . For example, players who excel 

defensively might receive more playing time against offensively stronger teams 

which could deflate their ratings. Future approaches could take this effect into 

account by comparing defensive metrics to an expected baseline model , such as 

by relating involvement -based metrics to responsibility -based metrics. The 

respon sibility model might also be biased towards weaker teams and more passive 

defending styles as these typically allow more passes which are therefore 

overrepresented in the data. This could be resolved by accounting for additional 

variables like team identity or pressing style in the model or using resampling 

techniques. 

Foundational modelling components like expected threat and expected receiver 

can introduce bias , too. It is currently not known how well xT generalizes between 

genders and competition levels . The domain transfer might therefore introduce a 

competition -dependent systematic bias . Also, the expected receiver estimate is 

optimized for computational efficiency, and its accuracy might be surpassed by 

more advanced approache s. Lastly, w hile the breadth of the data set used in this 

study is exceptional, its quality and potential resulting biases are hard to estimate 

due to the lack of available validation studies. 8 Conclusion 

This work introduces metrics based on involvement and responsibility as novel 

player performance indicators to make the under -appreciated skill of defensive 

positioning quantifiable. Involvement -based metrics assign fault or contribution 

for pass -related possession value changes among defenders based on their spatial 

proxi mity to the event while responsibility -based metrics represent the “expected 

involvement” based on player roles within automatically identified tactical 

formations. Ou r metrics display high er validity and robustness than tradition al 

defensive metrics based on tackles and interceptions across a uniquely broad data 

set, spanning genders and competition levels. By including a full season of 

women’s and lower -level professional men’s football, we demonstrate the 

applicability of our metrics on players who are underrepresented in the current 

research landscape. 

We find that both fault (involvement and responsibility related to high -valued 

passes of the opponent) and overall involvement and responsibility ratings are 

strongly associated with external evaluations of central defenders in elite 

competitions of both men’s and women’s football. Generally, fault -based metrics 

show stronger performance than contribution -based metrics while also being a 

particularly novel aspect of our modelling approach , measuring a failure to 

prevent dangerous passes . Overall, we find that there is no “one -size -fits -all” 

solution within the presented involvement -responsibility paradigm , as we find 

differences in metrics’ optimality betwee n competition levels and player roles. 

Our work introduces advanced metrics for the intricate problem of assigning 

individual defensive responsibility for offensive actions , improving our 

understanding of off -ball defen sive abilit y in sports .

## Statements and Declarations 

## Availability of Data and Materials 

The World Cup data is publicly available through the data provider :

https://www.blog.fc.pff.com/blog/enhanced -2022 -world -cup -dataset . The data 

from the Frauen -Bundesliga and 3. Liga is proprietary and can be requested from 

Deutscher Fußball -Bund (DFB). The code underlying this study is available on 

Github : https://github.com/jonas -bischofberger/defensive -network .

## Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Funding 

RM is funded by the China Scholarship Council (No. 2022 065 20005) .

## Authors’ contributions 

RM and JB conceptualized and implemented the work and wrote the manuscript. 

PB and KA provided access to part of the underlying data and gave feedback on 

the manuscript. AB supervised the work and gave feedback on the manuscript. 

## Acknowledgements 

We thank Maike Klemmer for helping us access the data. 

## References 

Andrienko G, Andrienko N, Budziak G, Dykes J, Fuchs G, von Landesberger T, 

Weber H. (2017) Visual analysis of pressure in football. Data Mining and 

Knowledge Discovery 31(6). 1793 -1839.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618 -017 -

0513 -2

Antonio. (2013) Defensive Metrics - An Introduction. 

https://blogarchive.statsbomb.com/articles/soccer/defensive -metrics -an -

introduction 

Anzer G, Arnsmeyer K, Bauer P, Bekkers J, Brefeld U, Davis J, Evans N, Kempe 

M, Robertson S J, Smith J W. (2025) Common Data Format (CDF): A 

Standardized Format for Match -Data in Football (Soccer). arXiv: 2505.15820v4. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.15820 

Anzer G, Bauer P. (2021) A Goal Scoring Probability Model for Shots Based on 

Synchronized Positional and Event Data in Football (Soccer). Frontiers in Sports 

and Active Living 3(1).  https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2021.624475 

Bauer P, Anzer G. (2021) Data -driven detection of counterpressing in 

professional football. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 35(5). 2009 -2049. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10618 -021 -00763 -7

Bauer P, Anzer G, Shaw L. (2023) Putting team formations in association football 

into context. Journal of Sports Analytics 9(1). 39 -59.  https://doi.org/10.3233/jsa -

220620 

Bischofberger J. (2025) Defensive Metrics.  https://github.com/jonas -

bischofberger/defensive -network Davis J, Bransen L, Devos L, Jaspers A, Meert W, Robberechts P, Van Haaren J, 

Van Roy M. (2024) Methodology and evaluation in sports analytics: challenges, 

approaches, and lessons learned. Machine Learning 113(9). 6977 -7010. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994 -024 -06585 -0

Donna S. (2025) Bundesliga - Deutschland.  https://www.soccerdonna.de 

Eigenrauch S, Bischofberger J, Baca A, Schikuta E. (2024) A Data Science 

Approach for Predicting Soccer Passes Using Positional Data. Information 

Integration and Web Intelligence: 26th International Conference, iiWAS 2024, 

Bratislava, Slovakia, Springer -Ve rlag. 

FBref. (2025) Virgil van Dijk. 

https://fbref.com/en/players/e06683ca/scout/1889/Virgil -van -Dijk -Scouting -

Report 

FC P. (2025) Unleash Your Inner Analyst: PFF FC's 2022 World Cup Dataset 

Now Available.  https://www.blog.fc.pff.com/blog/pff -fc -release -2022 -world -

cup -data 

Fernandez -Navarro J, Fradua L, Zubillaga A, Ford P R, McRobert A P. (2016) 

Attacking and defensive styles of play in soccer: analysis of Spanish and English 

elite teams. Journal of Sports Sciences 34(24). 2195 -2204. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2016.1169309 

Forcher L, Beckmann T, Wohak O, Romeike C, Graf F, Altmann S. (2024) 

Prediction of defensive success in elite soccer using machine learning - Tactical 

analysis of defensive play using tracking data and explainable AI. Science and 

Medicine in Football 8(4). 317 -332. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/24733938.2023.2239766 

Franks A M, D’Amour A, Cervone D, Bornn L. (2016) Meta -analytics: tools for 

understanding the statistical properties of sports metrics. Journal of Quantitative 

Analysis in Sports 12(4). 151 -165.  https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/jqas -2016 -0098 

Freitas R, Volossovitch A, Almeida C H, Vleck V. (2023) Elite -level defensive 

performance in football: a systematic review. German Journal of Exercise and 

Sport Research 53(4). 458 -470.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12662 -023 -00900 -y

Futbin. (2025) FIFA 22 statistics.  https://www.futbin.com 

Le H M, Carr P, Yue Y, Lucey P. (2017) Data -Driven Ghosting using Deep 

Imitation Learning. MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. Lee M, Jo G, Hong M, Bauer P, Ko S -K. (2025) exPress: Contextual Valuation 

of Individual Players Within Pressing Situations in Soccer. 19th Annual MIT 

Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, Boston. 

Llana S, Madrero P, Fernández J, Barcelona F. (2020) The right place at the right 

time: Advanced off -ball metrics for exploiting an opponent’s spatial weaknesses 

in soccer. The 14th MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. 

Markt T. (2025) Statistiken.  https://www.transfermarkt.de 

Merckx S, Robberechts P, Euvrard Y, Davis J. (2021) Measuring the 

effectiveness of pressing in soccer. The 8th Workshop on Machine Learning and 

Data Mining for Sports Analytics. 

Merhej C, Beal R J, Matthews T, Ramchurn S. (2021) What Happened Next? 

Using Deep Learning to Value Defensive Actions in Football Event -Data. 

Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & 

Data Mining, Virtual Event, Singapore, Asso ciation for Computing Machinery. 

Nisbett R E, Wilson T D. (1977) The halo effect: Evidence for unconscious 

alteration of judgments. Journal of personality and social psychology 35(4). 250. 

https://doi.org/  https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -3514.35.4.250 

Ogawa Y, Umemoto R, Fujii K. (2025) Pitch -wide space evaluation for soccer 

transitions. arXiv.  https://doi.org/https://arxiv.org/html/2505.14711v1 

Power P, Ruiz H, Wei X, Lucey P. (2017) Not All Passes Are Created Equal. The 

23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 

Data Mining. 

Rahimian P, Toka L. (2024) A data -driven approach to assist offensive and 

defensive players in optimal decision making. International Journal of Sports 

Science & Coaching 19(1). 245 -256. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/17479541221149481 

Renkin M, Bischofberger J, Schikuta E, Baca A. (2022) Validation and 

Optimisation of Player Motion Models in Football. Computational Science –

ICCS 2022, Cham, Springer International Publishing. 

Robst J, VanGilder J, Berri D J, Vance C. (2011) 'Defense Wins 

Championships?': The Answer from the Gridiron. International Journal of Sport 

Finance 6(1). 72 -84.  https://doi.org/10.1177/155862351100600105 

Ruan L, Ge H, Shen Y, Pu Z, Zong S, Cui Y. (2022) Quantifying the Effectiveness of Defensive Playing Styles in the Chinese Football Super League. Frontiers in 

Psychology 13(1).  https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.899199 

Singh K. (2018) Introducing Expected Threat (xT). 

https://karun.in/blog/expected -threat.html 

Statsbomb H. (2024) Free Data.  https://github.com/statsbomb/open -

data/tree/533862946a73608c134d18b78226b6371ce7173c 

Stöckl M, Seidl T, Marley D, Power P. (2021) Making offensive play predictable -

using a graph convolutional network to understand defensive performance in 

soccer. The 15th MIT sloan sports analytics conference. 

Toda K, Teranishi M, Kushiro K, Fujii K. (2022) Evaluation of soccer team 

defense based on prediction models of ball recovery and being attacked: A pilot 

study. PLoS One 17(1). e0263051.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0263051 

Trainor C (2014). "Defensive Metrics: Measuring the Intensity of a High Press." 

https://www.hudl.com/blog/defensive -metrics -measuring -the -intensity -of -a-

high -press .

Umemoto R, Fujii K. (2023) Evaluation of team defense positioning by 

computing counterfactuals using statsbomb 360 data. StatsBomb Conference. 

Van Roy M, Robberechts P, Decroos T, Davis J. (2020) Valuing On -the -Ball 

Actions in Soccer: A Critical Comparison of xT and VAEP. The AAAI -20 

Workshop on Artifical Intelligence in Team Sports, AI in Team Sports 

Organising Committee. 

Villa G, Lozano S. (2019) Assessing Offensive/Defensive Strategies in a Football 

Match Using DEA. International Journal of Sport Finance 14(3). 131 -146. 

https://doi.org/10.32731/ijsf/143.082019.01 

Wu Y, Swartz T. (2023) Evaluation of off -the -ball actions in soccer. Statistica 

Applicata -Italian Journal of Applied Statistics2). 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.26398/IJAS.0035 -008