Title: Wasserstein recurrence networks for multiscale time series pattern analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25155v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:13:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Wasserstein recurrence networks for multiscale time series pattern analysis 

B´ eatrice D´ esy, 1, 2, ∗ Nicholas R. Golledge, 2, 3 Hana Ishii, 2 and Markus Luczak-Roesch 1, 3 

> 1

School of Information Management, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 6140, New Zealand 

> 2

Antarctic Research Centre, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 6140, New Zealand 

> 3

Te P¯ unaha Matatini, Auckland 1142, New Zealand 

(Dated: June 25, 2026) Time series data are often generated by systems which operate on multiple temporal scales, of which Earth’s climate system is a paramount example. Variations in global climate are recorded in paleo-environmental archives as temporal patterns across a wide range of time scales, from seasonal or decadal to multi-millennial. In this context, recurrence analysis, where repeating patterns are identified in time series, is limited by the underlying properties of the distance function used and of the time series data themselves, especially in terms of temporal resolution and scale dependence. In this paper, we present a novel recurrence analysis framework designed for multiscale time series data with abrupt changes and irregular temporal resolution as found in paleoclimate records. We introduce a simple mathematical transform to use the 1 −Wasserstein distance for recurring pattern detection in time series. The scale invariance of 1 −Wasserstein distance distributions between patterns in Brownian motion is demonstrated numerically, which provides a principled threshold choice for recurrences. At any time scale, recurrences are defined as local minima of the distance, granted that they are below a threshold given by the probability of encountering patterns at least as similar in one-dimensional Brownian motion. Recurrences can be further combined according to a non-overlapping condition to yield a distinct set of multiscale recurring events. We provide examples of climatic applications from ice-rafted debris and ice core records, where detected recurrences have durations spanning over two orders of magnitude. Our method extends recurrence analysis to more complex time series data and provides new avenues for statistical identification and analyses of recurring events at multiple temporal scales. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

At the root of most knowledge systems that describe and predict natural phenomena, like physical laws, in-digenous science, and artificial intelligence, lies the abil-ity to detect and store information about patterns that recur over time. When repeating patterns are known, it is possible to start exploring the underlying processes that generated them. This is a challenging task when study-ing the Earth’s climate system, which operates on many different temporal and geographical scales all at once. Paleoclimate archives like ice cores and marine sediment cores capture rich data on both local and global climate patterns, but the data can be noisy, sparse, and more often than not unevenly sampled in time. Yet, it is im-portant to study past climates in order to gain a wider understanding of possible trajectories and tipping points in the context of anthropogenic climate change [1]. Methods to investigate paleoclimate data mostly fall into two main categories: directly analyzing the time se-ries or using the data to calibrate climate models [2, 3]. When bridging climate models and proxy data, the ubiq-uitous trade-off between model complexity and overfit-ting arises. Simpler models provide insight into physical processes but cannot exactly recreate empirical records. Complex models can reproduce features of elaborate pa-leoclimate data sets [4], but those models are very com-putationally costly to run and may be highly parameter- 

> ∗desybeatrice@gmail.com

ized [2]. To look into paleoclimatic data directly, exist-ing literature focuses on frequency analysis ( i.e. Fourier, wavelets, power spectrum) [5], which requires time se-ries preprocessing and creates non-trivial dependencies with the age model [6]. Methods that require uniform temporal sampling make an implicit assumption about what is noise – short temporal scale, abrupt changes – but in some climate records, abrupt changes capture real climate processes. On the other hand, many methods require detrending, which also erases important features in the data. Inspecting specific epochs or moments in time has provided numerous insights on past events like glacial terminations [7], but is inherently restricted. Here we present a novel method that offers an avenue to in-tuitively explore all the richness of raw temporal data whilst making minimal assumptions, simply asking what happens again and again, at all accessible time scales, without assuming an underlying model. Recurrence analysis has proven successful in provid-ing insights into various dynamical systems, including climate [8], heart rates and diseases [9], and the human brain [10], as well as detecting dynamical transitions in non stationary time series [11, 12]. The core idea of recur-rence analysis and time-delay embeddings is to identify values or patterns that recur over time [13, 14]. This family of approaches has been used to identify states in different elements of the global climate system, for in-stance to quantify transitions between epochs of climate regularity and periods of abrupt changes in precipitation data [15, 16] and palaeoclimate proxy records [8, 11, 12], relation between those transitions and human evolu-tion [17, 18], and more recently exploring the potential 

> arXiv:2606.25155v1 [physics.soc-ph] 23 Jun 2026

2for flood prediction [19]. In practice, existing methods are challenging to use due to requiring data preprocess-ing and non-trivial parameter choices [20], like which dis-tance function to use [21] and the similarity threshold to define a recurrence [22, 23]. For instance, to detect recurrences at a comparable time scale on paleoclimate data with uneven temporal resolution, one either has to interpolate [8], adapt the number of data points used depending on the resolution [17], or use non-standard metrics [24]. Using Euclidean time-delay embeddings for non-stationary time series creates a non-trivial interplay between the choice of threshold and the embedding di-mension (effectively the temporal duration of recurring patterns) [23]. A common approach is to set a fixed re-currence rate [12], or proportion of recurrences detected, which is independent from the number of recurring events in the underlying dynamical system. Local minima-based methods are an interesting avenue to address the thresh-old choice problem [25], which we develop in this work. Another limitation of existing methods is the study of re-currences of different durations. The well-known ”curse of dimensionality” for Lp metrics (which include the stan-dard Euclidean distance) makes it challenging to study events at multiple time scales all at once [10], especially across orders of magnitude in event duration. In the cli-mate system, the same short-scale event with different underlying conditions could yield a completely different long-term response [26]. Here we provide a new method to detect recurrences in multiscale time series and an analysis framework to map those to a network of recurring patterns over time. Our recurrence detection method is designed for realis-tic (noisy, sparse, unevenly sampled) temporal data that operates on many different time scales all at once. Our framework builds on the assumption that physical pro-cesses generating time series observations reveal them-selves through recurring events over time. All of the data is used, regardless of the temporal sampling, which facilitates detection of recurring events across different records. For multiscale time series, we introduce a choice of threshold with an intuitive interpretation in terms of confidence level. The main outputs of this work are twofold: i) a universal method to detect recurring pat-terns in messy time series data and ii) a distinct set of recurring events, spanning multiple time scales, on which statistical analyses can be performed. This work is structured as follows. First, we in-troduce some mathematical notation and how to use the well-known 1-Wasserstein distance for time series pattern recurrence detection. In § III, we study the distribution of Wasserstein distances between patterns in Brownian motion and show numerical invariance, which provides a principled threshold choice for pattern recurrences across multiple time scales. Building on those two sections, recurrences are defined as statis-tically significant closest patterns. We follow with a description of the multiscale network mapping frame-work in § IV. Finally, two applications on paleoclimate records are presented to illustrate our method in § V, on both very abrupt ice rafted-debris data for which Brownian motion is not an adequate null model, and an ice-core global temperature proxy over multiple ice ages to demonstrate the recurrence network across time scales. The applications we introduce are paleoclimatic, but our framework can be used to analyze any type of tem-poral data for which existing methods present similar drawbacks. Different facets of the methods can be used independently. In particular, one does not need to delve into network time series analysis to use the Wasserstein distance for repeated pattern detection in temporal data, which is exemplified in §V A. Our mapping from time se-ries to a network of recurring moments in time is inspired by prior work to study text data [27, 28]. Predictive ap-plications are outside the scope of this paper, and so is the question of causal links between recurrences.  

> II. WASSERSTEIN DISTANCE FOR RECURRENCE ANALYSIS

Here we define recurring patterns in time series as local minima of the 1-Wasserstein distance. Our framework to use the 1-Wasserstein metric is well suited for unevenly sampled time series data that operate over many different time scales all at once, as most other metrics would require interpolation or sub-sampling and re-parameterization for treating different recurrence durations. A local minimum is the closest definition of an exact recurrence that can be extended to imperfect quantitative data. This makes our method particularly fit for realistic time series and detecting similar patterns in different time series. An additional thresholding method to identify significant local minima in multiscale time series will be presented in the following § III. Let Y = {(yi, t i)}i=1 ,...,m ⊂ R2 be a real time series, 

i.e. a discrete ensemble of pairs ( yi, t i), where yi are 

values and ti are their time stamps t0 < t 1 < . . . < tm−1 < t m, which provide a total order on Y . An event 

or pattern x in the time series is defined as a consecutive subset of Y covering a given time interval [ t, t + ℓτ ]. It is identified as a function of its starting time t and its duration ℓτ ,

x(t, ℓτ ) = {(yi, t i) ∈ Y | t ≤ ti ≤ t + ℓτ }, (1) with ℓ ∈ N its duration in discrete time increments 

τ ∈ R. In this work, we use ”time scale” as a description of event length or duration ℓ, thus ”multiple time scales” refers to events of various durations. Patterns are equivalent to information tokens (like words or hashtags) in symbolic data, since they provide coarse-grained and temporally ordered information about the evolution of the system that generated the time series. A sequence of zeroes can be defined as an acceptable 3event or not depending on the context (e.g., for ice-rafted debris data, a sequence of zeroes is an absence of data, whereas for temperature data, it is a valid pattern). The Wasserstein 1 metric is a robust and elegant way to quantify the similarity between probability distribution functions (pdf) on metric spaces [29, 30]. Intuitively, it is the least work that would be required to “transform” one pdf into the other, where work is proportional to the probabilistic “mass” (area under the curve) and how much distance it has to be transported as quantified by the metric. It quantifies pattern similarity in a way that is more aligned with perceptual similarity in computer vision [31, 32] and has been used for time series classifi-cation [33], analysis [34], and numerous machine learning applications [35, 36]. Given two probability measures μ

and ν over a metric space ( X , d ) equipped with the dis-tance function d, and p ∈ [1 , ∞), the p-Wasserstein met-ric is defined as 

Wp(μ, ν ) = 



inf 

> π∈Π( μ,ν )

Z

> X ×X

d(x, y )pdπ(x, y )

1/p 

, (2) where the infimum is taken over all possible joint proba-bility distributions π having both μ and ν as marginals. Exponent values p = 1 and p = 2 are most useful, with the latter particularly suited when there is more struc-ture in the underlying metric space [30]. Since here it is the one-dimensional real line, we only consider p = 1 in what follows. With d(x, y ) = |x − y|, x, y ∈ R, an alternative and computationally efficient formulation of 

W1 is 

W1(μ, ν ) = 

Z

> R

F −1 

> μ

(t) − F −1 

> ν

(t) dt, (3) given in terms of the cumulative distribution functions (cdf) Fμ and Fν and their reciprocals 

F −1 

> i

(F (x)) = min {x | F −1 

> i

(F (x)) = x}, i = μ, ν . This result is attributed to Dobrushin [37] and an alternate derivation is presented in Ref. [38, Appendix]. With this formulation, the optimal transport problem is a linear programming one [36]. In order to use the Wasserstein metric in signal anal-ysis, subsequences of time series have to be transformed into probability measures. Consider a nonempty pattern 

x(t, ℓτ ) = {(yi, t i)}i=1 ,...,n x ⊂ Y . Following the notation from Ref. [33], let us define a mapping from x to a dis-crete measure μ(x) over the interval [0 , 1] as the weighted sum 

μ(x) = 

> nx

X

> i=1

αi δ

 ti − tℓτ 



, (4)                        

> 1This distance is also called Earth mover’s distance in com-puter science and Kantorovich–Rubinstein distance, after schol-ars whose work preceded Wasserstein’s.
> FIG. 1. Principle of the Wasserstein distance between dis-crete time series patterns xand x′. Both original patterns x
> and x′are shown by black dots (top and right), next to their transformation to discrete measures μ(x) and μ(x′), repre-sented as histograms. The matrix represents a joint probabil-ity distribution πthat has μ(x) and μ(x′) as marginals, with probability density proportional to darkness.

where δ is the Dirac delta function, nx = |x| is the num-ber of data points in x and weights αi are normalized values of the time series such that, 

αi = yi − min {yi} + f (x)

Pnx

> i=1

(yi − min {yi} + f (x)) . (5) The f (x) term is a lower bound defined as 

f (x) = 

(

1/n x if min {yi} = max {yi},  

> |max {yi}− min {yi}|
> nx

otherwise. (6) The lower bound on the translation of values depends on their range and on the number of points nx in the subsequence. If the range is bigger than the number of points, then even the lowest value still has a lot of weight, whereas if the number of points is very high, the lowest value gets closer to zero. This transformation from a time series pattern to a discrete probability measure is merely a rescaling in time and values; therefore it preserves the shape of the pattern. The 1-Wasserstein distance between x and any other pattern x′ in the time series (or another time series) can be computed as a composition of μ with W1,

W (x, x ′) := W1

 μ(x), μ (x′), (7) with W1 computed with Eq. (3). This process is illus-trated in Fig. 1 for a single pattern pair. W above is max-imal when the distance is computed between patterns 4that are single data points at each end of the time inter-val. Its value is then 1, which means W is conveniently bounded between 0 and 1. The rescaling in time could be equivalently done after measuring Wasserstein distances according to the property W (aX, aY ) = |a|W (X, Y ) [29, 

§2] with a = ℓτ . For 1D distributions, the numerical implementation of the Wasserstein distance reduces to a discrete numerical integral based on cumulative distri-bution functions. The function wasserstein distance 

provided in the SciPy package is used in our Python code and examples. The Wasserstein distance is particularly interesting for comparing subsequences of time series since it encom-passes distance in both time, the underlying metric space, and the shape of the signal. Unlike information-theoretic divergences, it does not depend on the size of the pat-tern and does not require patterns to contain the same number of data points to be compared. The Wasser-stein distance as defined above is able to capture similar-ity between time series patterns at many different time scales and does not require preprocessing, even when the temporal sampling rate varies. This is particularly rel-evant when processes at multiple time scales are inter-woven, because performing interpolation is making an 

ad hoc choice about what is noise and what is signal. Another common assumption when interpolating is that any abrupt change is attributed to noise, whereas the “signal” is supposed to be smooth, which cannot be said of most systems that undergo sharp transitions, for in-stance glacial terminations in paleoclimate data. Using a distance function readily applicable to raw or unevenly sampled data bypasses those issues. One aspect to note is that transforming from a pattern to a pdf in order to use the Wasserstein distance presumes that the physical processes underlying the time series are characterized by repeated modulations rather than recurrences of exact values. This might not be an adequate assumption for just any dataset. For any nonempty pattern x ∈ Y , its distance to all fu-ture patterns in the time series forms a function of time as shown in Fig. 2(b). Zeroes of this function would reflect exact recurrences of an identical event, up to a scaling constant. However, for most applications to real time series, the distance to all future patterns is likely to be strictly non-zero, meaning that any given pattern might occur exactly only once due to noise, imperfect data col-lection, or the nature of the dynamical system. There-fore, the definition of a recurrence is loosened using local minima of the distance function rather than zeroes. The local minima are defined with a search width in time of the order of the pattern duration ℓτ . This means that up until this point, our recurrence detection method is prac-tically free of tunable parameters, with the only choices being the discrete time step τ and recurrences duration 

ℓ.Yet, not all local minima are necessarily recurrences. Namely, even if a pattern does not recur, its distance to future patterns will still likely have local minima. For             

> FIG. 2. Definition of pattern recurrences using local minima of the Wasserstein distance. (a) Two patterns (darker shaded areas on the left) of different lengths, ℓ= 35 (blue) and ℓ= 70 (orange), with τ= 1 ,000 years or 1 kyr, are highlighted in an example time series. (b)-(c) Respective distance function to future patterns (blue and orange curves) with local min-ima characterizing recurrences (pale shaded areas in the top panel). The red horizontal dotted line represents the signif-icance thresholds for p= 0 .01 (see §III) and vertical gray lines highlight the local minima that are below the signifi-cance threshold.

some applications, like qualitatively comparing climate epochs from different paleoclimate records, one could identify a few of the closest recurring patterns ( i.e. the global minimum as the most similar recurrence, and so on). More quantitatively, a recurrence can be defined as a local minimum of the distance to other patterns that is also below a certain ”significance” threshold. Such a Wasserstein distance threshold for local minima to de-fine a recurrence can be chosen based on percentiles of the distance distribution [23]. Depending on the context, the dataset and research questions can also inform the choice of local minima, as exemplified in §V A, where we focus on local minima that happen at the same time for different time series. Alternatively, the following section introduces a principled Wasserstein distance threshold choice for recurrences in multiscale time series data.  

> III. RECURRENCES IN BROWNIAN MOTION

In this section, we show that for a time-scale-invariant random process, the distribution of Wasserstein distances between patterns is also scale invariant, which provides a principled distance threshold choice for recurrences. We study the Wasserstein distance as defined by Eq. (7) be-tween patterns generated with a numerical implementa-tion of a one-dimensional random walk and find that the 5               

> FIG. 3. (a) An example of Brownian motion trajectory and various pattern durations ℓ. (b) Wasserstein distance empirical distribution for patterns in Brownian motion at different time scales. Each distribution represents the distance between the first pattern and subsequent non-overlapping patterns for many different trajectories such that we have a total sample size of 10 6
> pairwise distances for each duration ℓ∈ { 1,5,10 ,30 ,50 ,100 ,500 }. Regardless of the time scale ℓ, the distances (0.019 ±0.001) and (0.032 ±0.002) correspond to p-values of 0.01 and 0.05, respectively highlighted by the red and black lines over the distributions and provided in Table I.

distance distributions are numerically invariant of pat-tern duration over two orders of magnitude. This in-variance in distribution provides a statistical significance test for recurrences in multiscale time series, given that Brownian motion is an adequate null model for the time series under study. Brownian motion is one of the simplest stochastic processes. Also called the Wiener process in the one-dimensional case, it can be thought of as the continu-ous generalization of a random walk. It is defined as a stochastic process {B(t) | 0 ≤ t < ∞} on a probability triple (Ω , F, P) with the following properties [39, §1] 1. B(0 , w ) = 0 for each w;2. B(·, w ) is continuous for each w;3. for 0 < t 1 < t 2 < . . . < t n−1 < t n, the increments 

B(t1), B (t2) − B(t1), . . . , B (tn) − B(tn−1)are independent and normally distributed, with means 0 and variances t1, t 2 − t1, . . . , t n − tn−1.

It follows from the latter property that it is scale in-variant, i.e. a−1B(a2t) is also a Brownian motion for all a > 0. This property and its analytical simplicity make it an ideal null model for our applications, since it makes minimal assumptions about an underlying dynam-ical process – only that increments are independent and normally distributed – whilst generating time series that vary across multiple time scales. An example trajectory is shown in Fig. 3(a). Remarkably, the scale invariance property of Brown-ian motion reflects on the distribution of our Wasser-stein distance implementation between patterns across time scales. Fig. 3(b) shows the empirical Wasserstein distance distributions between non-overlapping patterns for different recurrence time scales ℓ spanning over two orders of magnitude. All distributions are based on a histogram of 1 × 10 6 pairwise distances between non-overlapping patterns. More time series were sampled for longer pattern durations in order to achieve sam-ple size. The Brownian motion trajectories were gen-erated discretely using the cumulative sum of normal samples, with a resolution of 30 data points per time unit. Namely, this means that ℓ = 1 and ℓ = 100 pat-terns are respectively made of 30 and 3000 data points. Considering this vast range in resolution and time scale for all ℓ ∈ { 1, 5, 10 , 30 , 50 , 100 , 500 }, it is notable that all distributions seem to converge to the same proba-bility density function. Most, if not all, other distance functions would have very different distributions across varying time scales, as illustrated with normalized and standard Euclidean distance in Fig. 9, Appendix. This phenomenon has been an issue for time-delay embed-dings and threshold choice in recurrence analysis [23], especially at multiple time scales or when the temporal 6resolution varies over a time series. We observe a slight difference in the ℓ = 1 curve, as also depicted in the cu-mulative distribution functions shown in Fig. 8, which we attribute to numerical sampling size effects 2. Demon-strating the scale invariance analytically and obtaining closed-form expressions for the probability density func-tions of Wasserstein distance between patterns is still an open area of research. This invariance in distribution provides a mapping be-tween any given value of W and the probability of en-countering two patterns in Brownian motion at least as similar, regardless of their duration. This is the interpre-tation of the empirical cumulative distribution functions (cdf) illustrated in the Appendix, Fig. 8, and obtained from the pdf curves of Fig. 3. The cdf curves illustrate the probability of finding a non-overlapping pattern pair of equal duration in Brownian motion that has a given Wasserstein distance W smaller than given by the x-axis. Under a given null model, a p-value is the probabil-ity of measuring an outcome at least as extreme as the one observed [40]. Here, recurrences in Brownian motion provide a null model because recurring events can be de-tected as similar patterns without any underlying physi-cal significance to this resemblance. The scale invariance of Wasserstein distance distributions between patterns in Brownian motion provides a principled distance thresh-old choice for recurrences in multiscale time series. This invariant distribution generates a mapping between the left p-value p and a distance threshold εp, which has the following interpretation: if the distance between two pat-terns is less than εp, then in a one-dimensional random walk there is a probability less than p to detect two pat-terns as similar. The threshold is invariant of scale and independent of the time series under study, as it only depends on properties of patterns in Brownian motion. The choice of Brownian motion as a recurrence null model is based on its simplicity, variability at many scales, its dynamical system nature (as opposed to decor-related data points or a signal overlaid with random noise, for instance), and the empirical finding that the distance distribution of patterns does not vary with re-currence time scale ℓ. Other choices of null model could be considered; for instance, when dealing with particu-larly noisy data at only one time scale, one could work with the distance distribution in uncorrelated white noise of similar amplitude and sampling rate, such that the re-currence would be a local minimum that is “as unlikely as within purely uncorrelated noise”. Other threshold choice methods are available, for instance percentiles as in Ref. [23], which are used in § V A. Some threshold values εp for a few standard p values for significant recurrences are provided in Table I. The map-                   

> 2With fewer data points in the shortest ℓ= 1 patterns, the number of possible time series patterns is reduced and the distribution does not converge exactly to the same invariant distribution as with longer patterns.
> P-value Wasserstein distance Error 0.01 0.019 0.001 0.05 0.032 0.002 0.10 0.041 0.003 TABLE I. Wasserstein distance thresholds for a few standard p-values, considering a scale invariant Brownian motion null model for patterns recurrences. Error is 2 σacross time scales
> ℓ∈ { 1,5,10 ,30 ,50 ,100 ,500 }.

ping from a Wasserstein distance to the probability of such a distance arising between patterns in Brownian mo-tion is available as a lookup table [41] and the cdf curves are plotted in Appendices, Fig. 8. As with all analyses involving statistical significance testing, rejecting the null hypothesis does not guarantee statistical significance [42]. Despite those limitations, in some contexts, this inter-pretation does provide a principled threshold choice for the Wasserstein distance between patterns, as exempli-fied in §V B. The probability of encountering recurrences as similar in Brownian motion also offers the possibility to equip each recurrence with an error probability, which will be considered in future work.  

> IV. MULTISCALE RECURRENCE NETWORKS

Recurring patterns as defined through the previous sec-tions provide insights into the coarser temporal structure of complex time series. Here, we map them to a network, which acts as a data structure to facilitate information storage, navigation, and analysis. Time is divided into discrete time steps, which are nodes, before connecting pairs when they are both the initial time of a pattern recurrence. This yields a directed acyclic graph where the topological order is trivially dictated by the time or-dering of the nodes. The duration of recurring patterns is stored in the network as an edge attribute. Repeated patterns in the time series are reflected in the existence of pairwise connections in time. Thus, the network struc-ture is a tool to navigate temporal information embedded in time series recurrences at multiple time scales. For a given time series, the ensemble of detected re-currences depends on the number of discrete time steps 

N and the time scale ℓ at which the recurrence search is performed. First, a complete recurrence search is com-pleted at every time scale ℓ, which yields separate edge-lists over the same set of nodes. Then, those edgelists are merged into one multiscale edgelist, and overlapping recurrences are combined to avoid repetitions. All de-tails of the method are provided below, which is also illustrated schematically in Fig. 4. In what follows, we consider τ = 1 to simplify the notation. For a given pattern of length ℓ starting at time ti,a recurrence search consists of computing the Wasser-stein distance to all future patterns and identifying local minima below a significance threshold εp. A recurrence 7          

> FIG. 4. From detection at multiple time scales ℓto a mul-tiscale recurrences set. A complete recurrence search is per-formed at every time scale ℓ∈ { ℓmin , . . . , ℓ max }, using the same discrete time step τand Wasserstein distance thresh-old εp.Duplicates are removed according to an overlap η0,before combining recurrences across time scales and removing duplicates once more.

(i, j, ℓ ) is defined for such future events at time tj , where 

i and j are respectively the indices of recurring events at ti and tj , and ℓ is the duration. For instance, Fig. 2 shows two recurrences detected for the blue pattern and one for the orange pattern. A complete recurrence search at time scale ℓ is per-formed when all future recurrences of all patterns of length ℓ are detected. Starting from the oldest time step 

t0, a recurrence search is performed for recurrences of the 

x(t0, ℓ ) pattern in all future time steps using the local minimum condition and significance threshold. If two re-currences are detected at both ( ti, t j , ℓ ) and ( ti+1 , t j+1 , ℓ ), a single longer recurrence ( ti, t j , ℓ + 1) is defined. All the recurrences are stored in a complete edgelist at time scale ℓ, ¯Eℓ = [( i, j, ℓ ), . . . ]. Recurrences in ¯Eℓ can still overlap with one another. If overlapping recurrences are not wanted, for instance to perform quantitative analyses based on recurrence counts, those can be combined using the following scheme. The standard measure of overlap between two intervals 

I = [ a, b ] and I′ = [ a′, b ′] is given by 

|I ∩ I′| = max[0 , min( b, b ′) − max( a, a ′)] , (8) where we use standard set theory notation for the inter-section and |I| = b − a is an interval’s length. In the context of multiscale recurrences, where the goal is to quantify the total overlap between two pairs of intervals,                              

> Scheme Output tiOutput tjOutput ℓ
> mean ⟨ti⟩⟨tj⟩⟨ℓ⟩
> longest ⟨ti⟩⟨tj⟩max {ℓ}
> combine min {ti}min {tj}ℓ+12
>  max {ti} − min {ti}
> + max {tj} − min {tj}
> TABLE II. Possible schemes to combine overlapping recur-rences depending on the physical interpretation of the un-derlying time series data. Maxima, minima, and arithmetic means ⟨·⟩ are taken over the set of overlapping recurrences, often just a pair.

we define an overlap function η as follows 

η(I, J, I ′, J ′) = |I ∩ I′| + |J ∩ J′|

ℓ + ℓ′ (9) where I and J are intervals of duration ℓ respectively starting at ti and tj (and similarly for the primed re-currence). This yields a number between 0 and 1 that quantifies how much two recurrences capture the same in-tervals in the time series, with 1 only if both recurrences overlap perfectly and have the same duration. The pur-pose of using ℓ+ℓ′ as a normalization instead of the max-imum value of 2 min( ℓ, ℓ ′) is to account for recurrences of different duration. With the normalization in Eq. 9, two recurrences that perfectly overlap but have widely differ-ent durations can still be considered distinct, depending on the overlap threshold chosen. For a given recurrence set ¯Eℓ, one can compute the overlap η between all recurrence pairs and set a thresh-old η0 at which two recurrences are considered indistinct. In this work, we used η0 = 0 .8, which means that recur-rences that overlap more than 80% are treated as du-plicates. For every such set of overlapping recurrences, which effectively capture the same recurring event in the time series, we remove duplicates by combining them with one of the schemes listed in Table II. The simplest schemes are using the average starting times for each re-currence in the overlapping set and either the average or longest duration ℓ. The combine scheme ensures the resulting recurrence covers all possible overlapping in-tervals. Practical annotated examples are provided as notebooks in the code [41]. A recurrence search is performed at every accessible time scale ( ℓmin , . . . , ℓ max ), with the upper and lower bounds depending on the time series. For instance, the minimum temporal resolution for ℓmin and the longest expected event for ℓmax . When all edgelists Eℓ are de-tected, one can study recurrences across time scales. Al-ternatively, edgelists can be combined into one multi-scale edgelist ¯E containing all detected recurrences at any accessible time scales. This is akin to taking the set union of all edgelists. Depending on the desired in-dependence of recurrences required for further analyses, one can combine overlapping recurrences once more in the resulting multiscale edgelist. Removing duplicates twice renders the final multiscale edgelist E more sim-ilar to a set union, where repetitions of the same set 8element appearing in more than one of the original sets are not preserved. With intervals, the definition of du-plicate recurrences is not as strict as it would be with discrete elements but rather approximated by the over-lapping function η and an appropriate threshold and re-currence combining scheme. Even if our approach builds on similar underlying ideas, it bears a few differences with existing recurrence network analysis methods, both in terms of the distance function used and the conditions that define a recurrence. Most other similarity-based methods rely on threshold-ing the Euclidean distance between subsets of the time series [13, 14, 43], which is the principle of time-delay embeddings. In that case, the distance between patterns (x, t ) and ( x′, t ′) is computed as if x and x′ were Eu-clidean vectors, assuming an even temporal sampling. While successful in numerous theoretical applications, like reconstructing chaotic attractors and computing the invariant measure [44], using Euclidean distance on com-plex temporal data like financial, climatic, or biological time series has a few drawbacks. Takens’s theorem ap-plies to dynamical systems that are deterministic and evolving on a smooth manifold, which cannot be said of most real datasets. The Euclidean distance distribu-tion changes over time scale and point density, which means that the threshold has to be adjusted for different pattern lengths and time series (see Appendix , Fig. 9). The thresholding method based on the distribution of dis-tances suggested in Ref. [23] differs from ours in that the threshold still depends on the distances within the time series under study, whereas ours is based on an external statistical significance test. Another drawback of existing methods, especially information-theoretic divergences, is again the need for even temporal sampling, which calls for interpolation and preprocessing, or otherwise using only a subset of the data points to perform the embed-ding and recurrence analysis [11]. The general family of network time series analysis methods is reviewed in Refs. [43], which offers more insight into the mechanics of each method and the relations between them.  

> V. APPLICATIONS FOR PALEOCLIMATE RECORDS

In this section, we introduce two applications of our method on paleoclimate data, one where we find a spe-cific pattern in different time series and another where all the recurring events at multiple time scales are extracted from a single time series.  

> A. Pattern similarity in ice-rafted debris data

We provide a first example of how our method is ap-plied to find ice-rafted debris (IRD) patterns akin to the Holocene (the interglacial period that we are currently in) throughout the Late Pleistocene. This latter period encompasses previous ice ages where both the Southern Hemisphere (SH) and Northern Hemisphere (NH) had extensive ice sheet cover. This example compares distinct records of analogous physical phenomena with different temporal resolution. Ice-rafted debris are larger-sized debris 3 found in ma-rine sediment cores. These data are used as a proxy for ice sheet calving since only floating glacial ice can carry coarse debris from the ice sheet margin to sedimentation (and coring) sites. Cores retrieved from such sites are counted using X-ray scans or a sieving method, and their depth is transformed to an estimation of time using age models, which yields a record of IRD counts over time. We exemplify our method using IRD because these data are characterized both by sequences of zeros and by very abrupt shifts to high count layers, which are not easily treated in standard time series analysis methods and re-currence metrics. Furthermore, all three records have very unequal resolution. The Holocene stacked record from Weber et al. [46] covers the period from 7 to 25 thousand years before present (ka BP), extracted from the Scotia Sea in Antarctica and with a decadal reso-lution of 5 to 15 years. Also from the Scotia Sea, the Southern Hemisphere record is published by Jasper et al. [47]. We use drilling site U1537, which covers the last 1.2 million years with a 1 kyr resolution. The Northern Hemisphere record is published by Barker et al. [48], cov-ering the last 800 ka BP at a centennial resolution of 150 to 200 years, from Site 983 in the North Atlantic Ocean. As opposed to the global temperature proxy data shown in Fig. 2, the IRD time series are not Brownian motion-like, and therefore the threshold choice proposed in §III does not apply. Other methods can be used to choose the threshold under which local minima are con-sidered recurrences. If only a few recurrences are desired to facilitate inspection and interpretation of the IRD pat-terns, one can manually choose the closest patterns by looking into the local minima with the smallest Wasser-stein distances. To compare different records and identify all local minima below a threshold as recurrences, a per-centile method as introduced in Ref. [23] is the approach we adopt here. We compute the Wasserstein distances between the Holocene record and ℓ = 18 kyr long sliding windows every τ = 1 kyr of the last 450 ka BP of both the NH and SH IRD records. Local minima of the distance are detected within a search order of ℓ, and if they are below a Wasserstein distance threshold equivalent to the first quartile of distances (0.087 for SH and 0.095 for NH). The distance curves are shown on Fig. 5 (a), along with those local minima. Most patterns detected as similar to the Holocene record are happening at different times between the NH and SH records, which are highlighted by the  

> 3Typically identified as sediment grains coarser than 2 mm in diameter.

9      

> FIG. 5. Identifying similar patterns in different IRD records. (a) Southern hemisphere (orange) and (b) Northern hemisphere (blue) IRD record excerpts, which align with terminations TII-V, overlaid with the Holocene record in pale grey for visual comparison. (c) Wasserstein distance function between Holocene and both the SH record (orange curve) and the NH record (blue curve). Local minima are identified underneath the curves by markers, with triangle markers highlighting local minima that are aligned in time for both hemispheres. (d) EPICA Dome C (EDC) ice core deuterium profile as a proxy for global temperature and showing glacial-interglacial periods. Vertical grey lines in (c)-(d) show terminations TI-V from Bajo et al. [45] shifted by 25 −18 = 7 kyr to account for the start of the Holocene IRD record with respect to TI, and red dotted lines show additional local minima of the distance that align for both hemispheres during glacial inceptions of MIS 4/5 and MIS 8/9. Only panels (c) and (d) share the same x axis.

round markers in Fig. 5 (c). However, there are 7 simul-taneous SH-NH local minima to the Holocene (less than 4.5 kyr time difference between SH and NH local min-imum), shown by triangle markers. As expected, there is a local minimum at the last glacial termination (TI) in both records, which reflects that IRD patterns of the Holocene are similar in all three records. All the Late Pleistocene major glacial terminations are captured by IRD patterns similar to the Holocene in both SH and NH records at the same time. The IRD count data corresponding to those four non-trivial simi-lar patterns (terminations TII-TV) are plotted in Fig. 5 (a) and (b), along with the Holocene record for visual comparison and Wasserstein distance value at the local minima. Two other events, corresponding to Marine Iso-tope Stage (MIS) 5/4 and MIS 9/8 transitions from peak interglacial to glacial conditions, are found to be similar to the Holocene in both records at the same time. This reflects that ice sheet instability akin to the Holocene is present not only in major glacial terminations but also in periods of global cooling. In this example, the Wasserstein distance adequately reflects intuition of pattern similarity. For instance, the NH pattern closest to termination IV in Fig. 5 (b) is visu-ally quite different from the Holocene record. However, his dissimilarity is captured by the higher distance W ,which could be excluded by another threshold choice. Another notable aspect is that both distance curves in Fig. 5 (c) do not need to be shifted to be compared, despite the contrast in resolution for the NH and SH records. Our framework enables comparison of IRD pat-terns across records, despite different time resolution, age models, and complex data characterized by abrupt changes.  

> B. Antarctic ice core multiscale recurrence network

Our second example introduces a complete set of non-overlapping recurrences at multiple time scales for the longest available Antarctic ice core record. We cover two orders of magnitude of recurrence duration ℓ with the same detection method and parameters. The time series under scrutiny is the deuterium ratio profile in the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarc-tica Dome C (EDC) ice core [49], equipped with the most recent age model [50]. The deuterium ratio δD 

in the EDC record is proportional to global tempera-ture changes and captures high-resolution climate vari-ability in the Late Pleistocene. The record is plotted in Fig. 6 (a), which shows the variability at multiple time scales, the notable change in resolution between older and newer parts of the record, and the large-scale oscillation between glacial and interglacial periods. We choose a dis-10 crete time step interval of τ = 1 kyr for a total of N = 807 nodes between t0 = −806 .258 and tN −1 = −0.258 ka BP. We perform recurrence detection for all event lengths 

ℓ = 3 , 4, . . . , 120, with a Wasserstein distance threshold of 0.019 (see Table I). Recurrences that overlap more than 68% are then combined, within and across time scales (η0 = 0 .68, see Fig. 10 and Appendix for additional de-tails). The overlapping recurrences for which η < η 0 are re-defined using the combine scheme from Table II. The lower bound ℓ = 3 is chosen with the record’s lowest temporal resolution of 1 .2 kyr in mind, such that recur-ring patterns are neither trivial (a single data point) nor restricted to higher-resolution parts of the record. The resulting set of climate recurrences comprises 1601 event pairs of durations between 3 kyr and 138 kyr. The complete set of recurrences is illustrated as a matrix in Fig. 6 (b). Each recurrence is plotted twice, as a marker in the upper triangular matrix and as a trace in the lower triangular matrix. The markers best represent the loca-tion of each individual recurrence in time, whereas the traces provide more insight into the duration and juxta-position of recurrences across time scales. Figure 7 characterizes some properties of the EDC multiscale recurrence network. Durations ℓ in panel (a) follow a long-tailed distribution, which highlights that short-scale events are more numerous and diverse, but longer recurrences up to ℓ = 138 kyr capture glacial/interglacial larger climate oscillations. Fig. 7 (b) shows where recurrences are located in time. This panel is a projection of the matrix in Fig. 6 on the time axis. Both of these plots show more numerous connections between abrupt climate events like glacial terminations and inceptions but also reveal connections throughout the record between these and shorter events within and across glacial cycles. The distribution of time between events across time scales reveals a persistent pacing of the Late Pleistocene, which is explored further in sepa-rate work, along with a more detailed climatic analysis of the EDC multiscale recurrence network.  

> VI. CONCLUSION

We have introduced a framework to use the well-known Wasserstein metric to detect recurring patterns in messy or unevenly sampled time series data. Using our method, similarity can be quantified regardless of temporal sam-pling while exactly preserving patterns’ shape, the dura-tion of events and the richness of the underlying data. Recurrences are defined as local minima of the distance and an additional threshold can be used depending on the context and research questions. Our approach supports meaningful detection of similar patterns in challenging records or across different time series. When applied to Brownian motion trajectories, our definition of the distance between patterns is numeri-cally invariant in distribution across more than two or-ders of magnitude of patterns’ duration or time scale.     

> FIG. 6. Multiscale recurrence network for EDC ice core record. (a) EDC ice core deuterium ratio profile over time. (b) Matrix representation of the corresponding multiscale recur-rence network. In the upper triangle, each marker illustrates one recurrence ( i, j, ℓ ) at starting times ( ti, t j), with color and marker shape given by recurrence duration ℓ. In the lower tri-angle, the same recurrences are plotted as traces from ( ti, t j)to ( ti+ℓ, t j+ℓ).

This invariance provides a mapping between the Wasser-stein distance and the probability of pattern pairs being found as similar in a random walk. For a multiscale time series, which operates at many different time scales all at once, Brownian motion can be an adequate null model. In this case, there is a principled threshold choice for lo-cal minima of the distance to be considered significant recurrences. We provide a table of Wasserstein distance thresholds depending on the desired p-value of pattern similarity compared to a random walk null model. We then introduced a multiscale recurrence network framework to study the temporal structure of recurring patterns in time series across multiple time scales. One can either study the ensemble of recurrence networks at different time scales or combine them into one larger mul-tiscale network. We introduced a measure of overlap be-tween two recurrences, such that recurring events asso-ciated with each edge can be considered distinct up to a chosen level of overlap. The multiscale network en-codes the information of moments in time connected by similar patterns in the time series for various pattern du-rations. Compared to existing methods, our approach al-11             

> FIG. 7. Properties of the EDC multiscale recurrence network. (a) Distribution of durations ℓfor all recurrences detected in the EDC ice core. (b) Distribution of starting times ti, t jfor all recurrences ( i, j, ℓ ). (c) Distribution of intervals |tj−ti|
> between an event at time tiand its recurrence at time tj.

lows quantitative analyses on the recurrence counts over time, the time intervals between an event and its recur-rence, and the interplay between different time scales or durations. Finally, we illustrated our framework on two different paleoclimate applications. Our novel recurrence detec-tion method is ideal for uneven temporal resolution or highly non-continuous data like ice-rafted debris in ma-rine sediment cores. As an example of finding similar patterns across different records, we detect IRD patterns similar to the Holocene (last 25 ka BP) in longer ma-rine sediment records from the Northern and Southern hemispheres. We then introduced the multiscale recur-rence network of the EPICA Dome C ice core, a record of global temperature variability in the last 800 ka BP, with recurrences spanning over two orders of magnitude in duration across multiple glacial cycles. Characterizing recurring events in complex time se-ries is only a first step towards a broader understanding of the physical phenomena that generated those recur-rences. To further explore the underlying causes of re-curring patterns, one could use a causal inference frame-work [51] or transfer entropy for longer recurrences and denser time series [52]. In follow-up work on the EDC ice core recurrence network, we explore the relation between the timing of predominant recurrences and that of exter-nal orbital forcings, which influence global climate pat-terns. An interesting application of the scale invariance of our recurrence detection framework will be to study the fractal structure of various time series, including the cli-mate, but also biological and economic time series. Our approach is targeted to understanding the past rather than predictive applications, for which transformer-based methods are a promising avenue to integrate multiscale and multivariate information [53]. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Te Herenga Waka Victoria University of Wellington, and the Antarc-tic Research Centre at Te Herenga Waka Victoria Uni-versity of Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand. NRG is supported by grants ANTA1801 (“New Zealand Antarc-tic Science Platform”) and RTVU2206 (“Our Changing Coast”) from the New Zealand Ministry of Business, In-novation, & Employment. 

> CODE AVAILABILITY

Code implementing analyses and figures is written in Python and can be found at https://github.com/ bdesy/wasserstein recurrences , along with instruc-tions on where to access the paleoclimate archives ex-plored in this work, all publicly available. 

> AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION

B.D., M.L.R and N.R.G. designed the research, as well as analyzed and interpreted the results. B.D. wrote the codes for the numerical experiments and analyses. B.D. performed the research and wrote the manuscript. H.I. contributed to the design and analysis of §V A. All authors read, commented, edited, and approved the final version of the manuscript. 12 

Appendix: Additional figures 

FIG. 8. Cumulative distribution functions of the Wasser-stein distance between patterns in Brownian motion at differ-ent time scales, obtained by numerically integrating pdf from Fig. 3. The pdf are estimated using a smooth spline interpola-tion of degree 3 over the histograms, then converting negative values (which are artifacts of the spline interpolation) to zero and re-normalizing. 

In Fig. 10, the size of the EDC multiscale recurrence network shows two distinct asymptotic behaviors with overlap threshold parameter η0. For η0 ≪ 0.5, any re-currences with a slight overlap are combined, hence the network size collapses to a very few recurrences. For 

η0 ≫ 0.5, the number of recurrences explodes, because a very high number of duplicates are detected within and across time scales. There is a step-like transition at η0 = 0 .5, which can be explored using the definition of η in Eq. 9. Let us consider ℓ = ℓ′, such that 

η = 12

 |I ∩ I′| + |J ∩ J′|

ℓ



. (A.1) The value η0 = 0 .5 corresponds to a total overlap between both event pairs of the order of the recurrence duration 

ℓ. Further work with more records and synthetic time series would be needed to assess if this step-like behav-ior is universal or proper to this record. We hypothesize that for this particular system captured by the EDC ice core deuterium record, the total number of distinct re-currences is detected at η0 = 0 .68. For this value, we exclude the two asymptotic behaviors and the gradient of the curve in Fig. 10 is minimal, which means a small perturbation of η0 would have less impact on the number of recurrences detected. 

[1] Sandy P. Harrison, Patrick J. Bartlein, Esmeralda Cruz-Silva, Olivia Haas, Stephen T. Jackson, Nikita Kaushal, Mengmeng Liu, Donatella Magri, Dominic T. Robson, Guido Vettoretti, and I. Colin Prentice, “Paleoclimate Perspectives on Contemporary Climate Change,” Annual Review of Environment and Resources 50 , 67–95 (2025). [2] A. M. Haywood, P. J. Valdes, T. Aze, N. Barlow, A. Burke, A. M. Dolan, A. S. von der Heydt, D. J. Hill, S. S. R. Jamieson, B. L. Otto-Bliesner, U. Salzmann, E. Saupe, and J. Voss, “What can Palaeoclimate Mod-elling do for you?” Earth Systems and Environment 3,1–18 (2019). [3] Daniel J. Lunt, Bette L. Otto-Bliesner, Chris Brier-ley, Alan Haywood, Gordon N. Inglis, Kenji Izumi, Masa Kageyama, Darrell Kaufman, Thorsten Mauritsen, Erin L. McClymont, Ulrich Salzmann, Sebastian Steinig, Jessica E. Tierney, Anni Zhao, and Jiang Zhu, “Paleocli-mate data provide constraints on climate models’ large-scale response to past CO2 changes,” Communications Earth & Environment 5, 419 (2024). [4] Jessica E. Tierney, Emily J. Judd, Matthew B. Osman, Jonathan M. King, Olivia J. Truax, Nathan J. Steiger, Daniel E. Amrhein, and Kevin J. Anchukaitis, “Ad-vances in Paleoclimate Data Assimilation,” Annual Re-view of Earth and Planetary Sciences 53 , 625–650 (2025). [5] Graham P. Weedon, “Problems with the current prac-tice of spectral analysis in cyclostratigraphy: Avoiding false detection of regular cyclicity,” Earth-Science Re-views 235 , 104261 (2022). [6] Stephen R. Meyers, “Cyclostratigraphy and the problem of astrochronologic testing,” Earth-Science Reviews 190 ,190–223 (2019). [7] Stephen Barker, Lorraine E. Lisiecki, Gregor Knorr, So-phie Nuber, and Polychronis C. Tzedakis, “Distinct roles for precession, obliquity, and eccentricity in Pleistocene 100-kyr glacial cycles,” Science 387 , eadp3491 (2025). [8] Thomas Westerhold, Norbert Marwan, Anna Joy Drury, Diederik Liebrand, Claudia Agnini, Eleni Anagnos-tou, James S. K. Barnet, Steven M. Bohaty, David De Vleeschouwer, Fabio Florindo, Thomas Frederichs, David A. Hodell, Ann E. Holbourn, Dick Kroon, Vittoria Lauretano, Kate Littler, Lucas J. Lourens, Mitchell Lyle, Heiko P¨ alike, Ursula R¨ ohl, Jun Tian, Roy H. Wilkens, Paul A. Wilson, and James C. Zachos, “An astronomi-cally dated record of Earth’s climate and its predictabil-ity over the last 66 million years,” Science 369 , 1383–1387 (2020). [9] Guangyu Yang, Daolin Xu, and Haicheng Zhang, “A New Recurrence-Network-Based Time Series Analysis Approach for Characterizing System Dynamics,” En-tropy 21 , 45 (2019). [10] Thomas F. Varley and Olaf Sporns, “Network Anal-13 

FIG. 9. (a) Euclidean distance distributions between patterns in Brownian motion at different time scales. (b) Euclidean distance distributions between patterns in Brownian motion when patterns are normalised using Eqs. (4-6) before computing the standard Euclidean distance. In both cases, the distributions shift rather dramatically with time scale. 

FIG. 10. Number of edges in EDC multiscale recurrence network with increasing overlap threshold η0. The step at 

η0 = 0 .5 and the chosen η0 = 0 .68 for the EDC analysis are respectively highlighted by the dotted red line and the gray line. ysis of Time Series: Novel Approaches to Network Neuroscience,” Frontiers in Neuroscience 15 (2022), 10.3389/fnins.2021.787068. [11] J. F. Donges, R. V. Donner, K. Rehfeld, N. Marwan, M. H. Trauth, and J. Kurths, “Identification of dynam-ical transitions in marine palaeoclimate records by re-currence network analysis,” Nonlinear Processes in Geo-physics 18 , 545–562 (2011). [12] Norbert Marwan, Jonathan F. Donges, Yong Zou, Reik V. Donner, and J¨ urgen Kurths, “Complex network approach for recurrence analysis of time series,” Physics Letters A 373 , 4246–4254 (2009). [13] J.-P. Eckmann, S. Oliffson Kamphorst, and D. Ruelle, “Recurrence Plots of Dynamical Systems,” Europhysics Letters 4, 973 (1987). [14] Norbert Marwan, M. Carmen Romano, Marco Thiel, and J¨ urgen Kurths, “Recurrence plots for the analysis of com-plex systems,” Physics Reports 438 , 237–329 (2007). [15] Wen Zhang, Guoling Feng, and Qunqun Liu, “The Ap-plication of Recurrence Quantification Analysis in Detec-tion of Abrupt Climate Change,” Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society 2016 , e2689429 (2016). [16] Ankit Agarwal, Ravi Kumar Guntu, Abhirup Banerjee, Mayuri Ashokrao Gadhawe, and Norbert Marwan, “A complex network approach to study the extreme precip-itation patterns in a river basin,” Chaos: An Interdisci-plinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 32 , 013113 (2022). [17] Jonathan F. Donges, Reik V. Donner, Martin H. Trauth, Norbert Marwan, Hans-Joachim Schellnhuber, and J¨ urgen Kurths, “Nonlinear detection of paleoclimate-variability transitions possibly related to human evolu-tion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

108 , 20422–20427 (2011). [18] Martin H. Trauth, Asfawossen Asrat, Walter Duesing, Verena Foerster, K. Hauke Kraemer, Norbert Marwan, Mark A. Maslin, and Frank Schaebitz, “Classifying past climate change in the Chew Bahir basin, southern Ethiopia, using recurrence quantification analysis,” Cli-mate Dynamics 53 , 2557–2572 (2019). [19] Jianxin Zhang, Kai Liu, Ming Wang, Kaiwen Li, Fenying Cai, Josef Ludescher, J¨ urgen Kurths, and Norbert Mar-wan, “High predictability potential of highly synchro-nized widespread floods in monsoon regions,” Journal of 14 

Hydrology 668 , 135006 (2026). [20] Norbert Marwan, “How to avoid potential pitfalls in re-currence plot based data analysis,” International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 21 , 1003–1017 (2011). [21] Reik V. Donner, “Ambiguities in recurrence-based com-plex network representations of time series,” Physical Re-view E 81 (2010), 10.1103/PhysRevE.81.015101. [22] S. Schinkel, O. Dimigen, and N. Marwan, “Selection of recurrence threshold for signal detection,” The European Physical Journal Special Topics 164 , 45–53 (2008). [23] K. Hauke Kraemer, Reik V. Donner, Jobst Heitzig, and Norbert Marwan, “Recurrence threshold selection for ob-taining robust recurrence characteristics in different em-bedding dimensions,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Jour-nal of Nonlinear Science 28 , 085720 (2018). [24] Ibrahim Ozken, Deniz Eroglu, Sebastian F. M. Breit-enbach, Norbert Marwan, Liangcheng Tan, Ugur Tir-nakli, and J¨ urgen Kurths, “Recurrence plot analysis of irregularly sampled data,” Physical Review E 98 , 052215 (2018). [25] Aaron P. Schultz, Yong Zou, Norbert Marwan, and Michael T. Turvey, “Local minima-based recurrence plots for continuous dynamical systems,” International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 21 , 1065–1075 (2011). [26] Edward Hanna, D´ aniel Top´ al, Jason E. Box, Sammie Buzzard, Frazer D. W. Christie, Christine Hvidberg, Mathieu Morlighem, Laura De Santis, Alessandro Sil-vano, Florence Colleoni, Ingo Sasgen, Alison F. Ban-well, Michiel R. van den Broeke, Robert DeConto, Jan De Rydt, Heiko Goelzer, Alexandra Gossart, G. Hilmar Gudmundsson, Katrin Lindb¨ ack, Bertie Miles, Ruth Mottram, Frank Pattyn, Ronja Reese, Eric Rignot, Aakriti Srivastava, Sainan Sun, Justin Toller, Peter A. Tuckett, and Lizz Ultee, “Short- and long-term variabil-ity of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets,” Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 5, 193–210 (2024). [27] Markus Luczak-Roesch, Ramine Tinati, and Nigel Shad-bolt, “When Resources Collide: Towards a Theory of Coincidence in Information Spaces,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web ,WWW ’15 Companion (Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 2015) pp. 1137–1142. [28] Markus Luczak-Roesch, Kieron O’Hara, Jesse David Din-neen, and Ramine Tinati, “What an Entangled Web We Weave: An Information-centric Approach to Time-evolving Socio-technical Systems,” Minds and Machines 

28 , 709–733 (2018). [29] Victor M. Panaretos and Yoav Zemel, “Statistical As-pects of Wasserstein Distances,” Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application 6, 405–431 (2019). [30] C´ edric Villani, Optimal Transport , edited by M. Berger, B. Eckmann, P. De La Harpe, F. Hirzebruch, N. Hitchin, L. H¨ ormander, A. Kupiainen, G. Lebeau, M. Ratner, D. Serre, Ya. G. Sinai, N. J. A. Sloane, A. M. Vershik, and M. Waldschmidt, Grundlehren Der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, Vol. 338 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009). [31] Yossi Rubner, Carlo Tomasi, and Leonidas J. Guibas, “The Earth Mover’s Distance as a Metric for Image Re-trieval,” International Journal of Computer Vision 40 ,99–121 (2000). [32] Oliver M. Crook, Mihai Cucuringu, Tim Hurst, Carola-Bibiane Sch¨ onlieb, Matthew Thorpe, and Konstanti-nos C. Zygalakis, “A linear transportation Lp distance for pattern recognition,” Pattern Recognition 147 , 110080 (2024). [33] Michael Muskulus and Sjoerd Verduyn-Lunel, “Wasser-stein distances in the analysis of time series and dynami-cal systems,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 240 , 45– 58 (2011). [34] Elsa Cazelles, Arnaud Robert, and Felipe Tobar, “The Wasserstein-Fourier Distance for Stationary Time Se-ries,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 69 , 709– 721 (2021). [35] Peyr´ e Gabriel and Cuturi Marco, “Computational Op-timal Transport with Applications to Data Sciences,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 11 , 355– 607 (2019). [36] Soheil Kolouri, Se Rim Park, Matthew Thorpe, De-jan Slepcev, and Gustavo K. Rohde, “Optimal Mass Transport: Signal processing and machine-learning ap-plications,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 34 , 43–59 (2017). [37] R. L. Dobrushin, “Prescribing a System of Random Vari-ables by Conditional Distributions,” Theory of Probabil-ity & Its Applications 15 , 458–486 (1970). [38] Aaditya Ramdas, Nicolas Garcia, and Marco Cuturi, “On Wasserstein Two Sample Testing and Related Fam-ilies of Nonparametric Tests,” (2015), arXiv:1509.02237 [math, stat]. [39] David Freedman, Brownian Motion and Diffusion , 1st ed. (Springer, New York, NY, 1983). [40] David Jean Biau, Brigitte M. Jolles, and Rapha¨ el Porcher, “P Value and the Theory of Hypothesis Test-ing: An Explanation for New Researchers,” Clinical Or-thopaedics and Related Research 468 , 885–892 (2010). [41] B´ eatrice D´ esy, “Code for analysis and figures for pa-per...” Zenodo (2026). [42] Regina Nuzzo, “Scientific method: Statistical errors,” Na-ture 506 , 150–152 (2014). [43] Vanessa Freitas Silva, Maria Eduarda Silva, Pedro Ribeiro, and Fernando Silva, “Time series analysis via network science: Concepts and algorithms,” WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 11 , e1404 (2021). [44] Floris Takens, “Detecting strange attractors in turbu-lence,” in Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, War-wick 1980 , edited by David Rand and Lai-Sang Young (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1981) pp. 366–381. [45] Petra Bajo, Russell N. Drysdale, Jon D. Woodhead, John C. Hellstrom, David Hodell, Patrizia Ferretti, An-tje H. L. Voelker, Giovanni Zanchetta, Teresa Rodrigues, Eric Wolff, Jonathan Tyler, Silvia Frisia, Christoph Sp¨ otl, and Anthony E. Fallick, “Persistent influence of obliquity on ice age terminations since the Middle Pleis-tocene transition,” Science 367 , 1235–1239 (2020). [46] M. E. Weber, P. U. Clark, G. Kuhn, A. Timmer-mann, D. Sprenk, R. Gladstone, X. Zhang, G. Lohmann, L. Menviel, M. O. Chikamoto, T. Friedrich, and C. Ohlwein, “Millennial-scale variability in Antarctic ice-sheet discharge during the last deglaciation,” Nature 

510 , 134–138 (2014). [47] Claire E. Jasper, Blake Dyer, Brendan T. Reilly, Trevor Williams, Sidney Hemming, and Maureen E. Raymo, “A 3.3-Million-Year Record of Antarctic Iceberg Rafted Debris and Ice Sheet Evolution Quantified by Machine Learning,” Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology 39 ,e2024PA004897 (2024). [48] Stephen Barker, Gregor Knorr, Stephen Conn, Sian 15 

Lordsmith, Dhobasheni Newman, and David Thornalley, “Early Interglacial Legacy of Deglacial Climate Instabil-ity,” Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology 34 , 1455– 1475 (2019). [49] J. Jouzel, V. Masson-Delmotte, O. Cattani, G. Drey-fus, S. Falourd, G. Hoffmann, B. Minster, J. Nouet, J. M. Barnola, J. Chappellaz, H. Fischer, J. C. Gallet, S. Johnsen, M. Leuenberger, L. Loulergue, D. Luethi, H. Oerter, F. Parrenin, G. Raisbeck, D. Raynaud, A. Schilt, J. Schwander, E. Selmo, R. Souchez, R. Spahni, B. Stauffer, J. P. Steffensen, B. Stenni, T. F. Stocker, J. L. Tison, M. Werner, and E. W. Wolff, “Orbital and Millennial Antarctic Climate Variability over the Past 800,000 Years,” Science 317 , 793–796 (2007). [50] Marie Bouchet, Ama¨ elle Landais, Antoine Grisart, Fr´ ed´ eric Parrenin, Fr´ ed´ eric Pri´ e, Roxanne Jacob, Elise Fourr´ e, Emilie Capron, Dominique Raynaud, Vladimir Ya Lipenkov, Marie-France Loutre, Thomas Extier, Anders Svensson, Etienne Legrain, Patricia Mar-tinerie, Markus Leuenberger, Wei Jiang, Florian Rit-terbusch, Zheng-Tian Lu, and Guo-Min Yang, “The Antarctic Ice Core Chronology 2023 (AICC2023) chrono-logical framework and associated timescale for the Euro-pean Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) Dome C ice core,” Climate of the Past 19 , 2257–2286 (2023). [51] Jakob Runge, Andreas Gerhardus, Gherardo Varando, Veronika Eyring, and Gustau Camps-Valls, “Causal in-ference for time series,” Nature Reviews Earth & Envi-ronment 4, 487–505 (2023). [52] Alec Kirkley, “Transfer entropy for finite data,” Physical Review E 112 , L052304 (2025). [53] Vahid Naghashi, Mounir Boukadoum, and Ab-doulaye Banire Diallo, “A multiscale model for multivari-ate time series forecasting,” Scientific Reports 15 , 1565 (2025).